" The Emperor is our Father and our Guardian, but we must also Guard the Emperor. "
The Adepta Sororitas , colloquially called the " Sisterhood ,"  whose military arm is also known as the Sisters of Battle and formerly as the Daughters of the Emperor , are an all-female division of the Imperium of Man 's state church known as the Ecclesiarchy or, more formally, as the Adeptus Ministorum .
The Sisterhood's Orders Militant serve as the Ecclesiarchy's armed forces, mercilessly rooting out spiritual corruption and heresy within Humanity and every organisation of the Adeptus Terra .
There is naturally some overlap between the duties of the Sisterhood and the Imperial Inquisition ; for this reason, although the Inquisition and the Sisterhood remain entirely separate organisations, the Orders Militant of the Adepta Sororitas also act as the Chamber Militant of the Inquisition's Ordo Hereticus .
The Adepta Sororitas and the Sisters of Battle are commonly regarded as the same organisation, but the latter title technically refers only to the Orders Militant of the Adepta Sororitas, the best-known part of the organisation to the Imperial public.
The Sisterhood serves as the Ministorum's only official military force because the Decree Passive laid down by the reformist Ecclesiarch Sebastian Thor held that in the wake of the Age of Apostasy 's Reign of Blood in the 36th Millennium, the Ecclesiarchy cannot maintain any "men under arms."
This command was supposed to limit the power of the Ecclesiarchy by preventing it from maintaining the massive armies of the faithful Frateris Templar it once used to abuse its power from the 32nd to the 36th Millennia.
However, the Adeptus Ministorum has been able to circumvent this decree with the subtle acquiescence of the Inquisition by deploying the all-female military force of the Sisterhood's Orders Militant.
Contents
History
Sisters of Battle fighting against the foes of the Emperor.
The Adepta Sororitas, also known as the Sisters of Battle, are an elite sisterhood of warriors raised from infancy to adore and worship the Emperor of Mankind . Their fanatical devotion and unwavering spiritual purity is a bulwark against corruption, heresy and alien attack, and once battle has been joined they will stop at nothing until their enemies are utterly crushed.
Battle-Sisters will stride through fire if need be, their bolters spitting staccato bursts of destruction every step of the way. Not even death can stay the wrath of the Adepta Sororitas -- indeed, the blood of martyrs only strengthens the resolve of battle-sisters, spurring them to greater acts of heroism in the name of the honoured fallen.
The Adeptus Ministorum -- or the Ecclesiarchy as it is generally known in the Imperium -- is a monolithic state church founded on the worship of the God-Emperor as the saviour of Mankind and the preaching of the Imperial Creed throughout the whole galaxy.
The Sisters of Battle are the army of the Ecclesiarchy. Clad in ceramite power armour , they carry an awesome array of weaponry with which to vanquish their enemies; the incredible wealth of the Ecclesiarchy ensures that they are equipped with the best wargear the Imperium has to offer.
The Sisters of Battle are trained to the peak of human ability and stand amongst Mankind's most dedicated and disciplined warriors. Wherever there are foes of the Emperor, the Sisters of Battle will be found fighting with faith and steel. When not actively prosecuting the Ecclesiarchy's wars, the battle-sisters of the Orders Militant divide their time between rigorous training and devout worship of the God-Emperor.
A Canoness of the Adepta Sororitas.
Indeed, to the Adepta Sororitas, the disciplines are nigh inseparable, for whilst combat drills and studies of battle tactics can hone the body and the mind, only penitent prayer can bolster the spirit, and all three are required to defeat the Imperium's foes.
The combination of combat doctrine and prayer is most evident on the battlefield, where battle-sisters loudly proclaim their faith in hymn and verse as they march to war, calling upon the Emperor to aid them in the fight against their enemies.
The intense, unquestioning nature of this faith is a potent weapon indeed, manifesting as divine inspiration that drives the Sororitas to unprecedented feats of martial prowess.
Sisters of Battle gripped with holy fervour banish worldly fears from their minds, shrug off mortal wounds, and summon preternatural strength to smite their foes.
The Sisters of Battle believe their faith to be a weapon stronger than any steel, and those who witness their battlefield miracles are left in no doubt that the spirit of the Emperor indeed walks with these pious warriors.
Once battle has been joined, the Adepta Sororitas will stop at nothing until their enemies are utterly crushed.
The Age of Apostasy
" Blackest of Ages, Saddest of Times. Let none give name to he that laid us low... "
A  Battle-Sister of the Orders Militant outfitted in her power armour .
The Adepta Sororitas date their founding from the 36 th Millennium during the turbulent times known as the Age of Apostasy . During this age the Ecclesiarchy held nigh-total power, which it used to ensure that every single subject of the Emperor in the Imperium paid their dues, both spiritually and financially, to the duly appointed officers of the faith. In time, the Ministorum exercised such power that it began to dictate the policies of the ruling Senatorum Imperialis of the High Lords of Terra .
The ecclesiarch came to be viewed as speaking with the authority of the Emperor Himself, and he influenced every aspect of the governance of the Imperium. Perhaps it was inevitable that the other great bureaucracies of the Imperium should grow resentful of the Ministorum.
The Adeptus Administratum in particular found its own powers greatly curtailed, for the Ministorum's tithes took precedence over its own raising of funds and resources, leaving little in the coffers to pay for the running of the secular components of the Imperium.
The Administratum's political influence soon waned so far that the Ministorum was able to dictate policy in secular matters as well. The raising and deployment of armies, the prosecution of wars, the commitment of significant Imperial resources and the appointment of sector lords all fell under the effective control of the Ministorum.
In time, other institutions began to distrust the Ministorum's power, and the Adeptus Astartes and the Adeptus Mechanicus in particular became increasingly estranged from the Ministorum-dominated Imperial government.
As if the situation could not get any worse, the entire Imperium was soon plunged into even deeper despair. The incidence of Warp Storms , a phenomenon that cuts off vast swathes of the Imperium's space from interstellar travel and communication, increased by an order of magnitude.
The Warp began to seethe with roiling energies which bled forth into realspace , making travel between anything other than worlds in the same planetary system increasingly perilous. Central governance of worlds limited to periodic contact at the best of times entirely collapsed.
Where the Black Ships of the Adeptus Astra Telepathica were unable to get through, entire populations fell to daemonic incursion or Enslaver domination. Civil war and anarchy beset the Imperium, with those planets that remained accessible being ruthlessly suppressed by the increasingly brutal Frateris Templars . Seeing that their foes were tearing themselves apart, the myriad enemies of humanity struck.
The Traitor Legions sallied forth from the Eye of Terror , using their own blasphemous sorceries to strike planets otherwise cut off from outside aid. Orks traversed the Warp in their ramshackle Space Hulks , uncaring where the tides of the Empyrean regurgitated them and wreaking havoc in regions previously beyond their reach.
The Drukhari used their Webway to freely navigate the galaxy, and struck wherever they desired, dragging millions of captives screaming to their infernal realm of Commorragh , to suffer tortures and degradations beyond a sane man's imagination.
The entire Imperium was gripped by an apocalyptic frenzy of doom and anarchy. Countless new sects sprung into being, many proclaiming that the God-Emperor was enacting His final judgement upon Mankind and that the end times were at hand.
No world was untouched by the anarchy, as whole populations rose up in increasingly bizarre and extravagant acts of penance and self-flagellation. Anyone who dared attempt to reason with such doomsayers were declared Heretics , and world after world tore themselves apart in an orgy of bloodletting and violent penance.
Onto this doom-laden stage stepped the insane Goge Vandire , the 361 st Master of the Administratum , a position he had attained by the ruthless application of bribes, threats and outright assassination. A strident opponent of the Ministorum, Vandire had plotted against it for many standard years.
Shortly before his ascension to the rank of High Lord, Vandire brought about the selection of a man of his own choosing to head the Ecclesiarchy, ensuring that none could stand before his subsequent rise.
As confidence in the new puppet- ecclesiarch , Paulis III, plummeted due to his reputation for incompetence and venality, Goge Vandire made his move, taking control of the Ecclesiarchy in a military coup d'etat orchestrated by Astra Militarum officers under his control who simply executed Paulis III outright, claiming that his behaviour proved that he was a heretic and made him unfit for his office.
Vandire then used the support of various Ministorum cardinals he had bribed and otherwise brought under his influence to immediately call a conclave that selected him as the new ecclesiarch.
Assuming the dual roles of ecclesiarch and master of the Administratum to become the most powerful person in the Imperium of Man, Vandire succeeded ultimately only in driving the Imperium into the bitterest period of civil war and rebellion it had known since the Horus Heresy -- remembered as the Reign of Blood .
Daughters of the Emperor
A Sister of Battle unleashing her Bolter on the foes of the Emperor .
Early in his tyrannical rule, Vandire's agent sent him word of a unique sisterhood of warrior-women living on the little known Agri-world of San Leor . Hearing of their ascetic way of life, their utter dedication to the Emperor, and in particular their skills at arms, Vandire decided that he would make a formal visit to the secluded convent of the "Daughters of the Emperor."
The first that the inhabitants of San Leor knew about the state visit by the man who was the de facto lord of the Imperium was when several thousand of his retainers marched into their simple towns, and demanded that they show the High Lord the utmost devotion, on pain of death. Images of these vast processions were recorded by the spy-lenses of hundreds of Servo-skulls , and disseminated across every world in the Imperium not cut off by the raging Warp Storms. The image of the High Lord Vandire being "welcomed" to San Leor became a staple of Ecclesiarchy propaganda.
When at last the vast cavalcade reached the gates of the convent in which the Daughters of the Emperor resided, Vandire found them barred and closed. The voice of the gatekeeper informed the High Lord that the Daughters of the Emperor recognised only the authority of the God-Emperor Himself, and would open their gates to no man. Vandire's attendants cringed in anticipation of an explosion of rage, yet uncharacteristically, the High Lord remained calm.
In a serene manner, Vandire told the gatekeeper that he would prove that he spoke with the authority of the Emperor Himself, if they would allow him to enter their convent with but a small bodyguard. The Daughters of the Emperor acceded to Vandire's request, and the High Lord and a small group of his retainers were led into the central courtyard. There, Vandire announced to the gathered sisters that he would prove that the Emperor's Grace was upon him, and that should he lie, he would be slain.
Vandire brandished his Rosarius , and ordered one of his bodyguards to shoot him. The man was dumbfounded, and fearful of harming his master, but Vandire insisted. Forcing his trembling hand to stillness, the guard aimed his Laspistol straight at Vandire's heart and fired. Vandire was consumed in a blinding white light, and when the vision of the gathered witnesses had cleared, they saw that he stood unharmed before them. All in the courtyard went down upon their knees, and the Daughters of the Emperor proclaimed their fealty to High Lord Vandire.
In truth, Vandire had tricked the sisters, gambling that they would never have seen a Rosarius. It was the energy field projected by the generator within the ornate medallion that had turned the guard's shot, and not the protection of the Emperor. Nonetheless, the Daughters of the Emperor promised themselves to serve their new master, and at his word changed the name of their order to the "Brides of the Emperor."
The sisters became Vandire's personal bodyguard, and their skill at arms was enhanced by training in the finest weapons and armour the High Lord could provide. The Brides of the Emperor would stand at Vandire's side wherever he went, and they were both his bodyguards and his executioners. Word of their dedication spread across the worlds of the Imperium, and none who entered the High Lord's presence would so much as look at him askance under the silent, watchful gaze of the Brides of the Emperor.
The Terran Crusade
Countless millions soon burned in the fires of Vandire's Reign of Blood. It was during this dark, forbidding time that a reformist sect known as the Confederation of Light emerged and denounced Vandire as a Traitor. Led by the preacher Sebastian Thor , the Confederation of Light spread its message of a church dedicated not to politics and the secular rule of the Imperium but to the compassion and mercy of the Emperor to a brutalised people only too ready to throw off the yoke of oppression.
An orator of supreme skill, Sebastian Thor swayed whole worlds to his cause and turned the tide against Vandire. As Thor's crusade smashed aside those who remained loyal to the Ecclesiarch, the Space Marines and the Adeptus Mechanicus, both of whom had remained largely on the defensive during the Age of Apostasy, were finally able to join forces with Thor and close on Terra .
As Vandire's madness had become all too apparent, the Fabricator-General , Gastaph Hediatrix , of the Adeptus Mechanicus roused the Senatorum Imperialis to oust Vandire from power. Vandire's answer was to dissolve the Senatorium Imperialis and declare both the Mechanicus and the Adeptus Astartes Heretics and Traitors to the Imperium.
This affront made the Space Marines reconsider their neutrality toward Vandire and the Reign of Blood in general, and at the height of the Age of Apostasy in 378.M36, an elite Space Marine strike force composed of forces drawn from the Imperial Fists , Black Templars , Fire Hawks , Soul Drinkers , and the forces of the Adeptus Mechanicus assaulted the Renegade High Lord Goge Vandire's seat of power -- the massive Ecclesiarchal Palace on Terra .
The Space Marines, believing Vandire to be only protected by legions of zealous but ineffective Frateris Templar troops, launched one of their trademark lightning Drop Pod assaults. However, once on the ground, the Astartes found to their dismay that they had grossly underestimated the opposition. Facing them were a corps of superbly trained warrior women, clad in Power Armour and wielding Bolters , who fought with a passion remarkable even to their Astartes opponents and stood their ground to the last woman, fearless and fanatical in the belief that they were protecting the Emperor Himself.
The Space Marines' assault bogged down as they were pushed back with casualties, and the attackers were forced to resort to a long, grinding and bloody siege of the Ecclesiarchal Palace complex with quarter neither asked for nor given. For solar months, Vandire's army withstood every assault. The madness only ended when Centurion Longinus of the Adeptus Custodes -- the praetorian guard of the Emperor Himself -- sought out Alicia Dominica and her most trusted companions, the leaders of Vandire's bodyguard.
Longinus took them before the Golden Throne and the God-Emperor, and though no written histories tell of what transpired there, it was evident that some great truth was passed to Dominica and her fellow warriors. When they emerged from the bowels of the Imperial Palace they marched with barely-controlled fury to Vandire's audience chamber.
There, they found him in the midst of yet another insane tirade, pausing only to condemn him for his crimes against the Emperor. Reportedly, Vandire's final words were "I don't have time to die -- I'm too busy!"
Alicia Dominica drew her Power Sword and beheaded the High Lord. It is said that at the moment of truth Vandire's Rosarius, which had protected him upon San Leor, now failed him, its gleaming form cleaved in two by Alicia's blow. The Reign of Blood was over.
The Reformation of the Ecclesiarchy
" Let the word of the Emperor be heard once more wherever men gather and look upwards unto the stars. Let them know that the Emperor looks back upon them, from the Golden Throne, wherever in this benighted galaxy they might reside. "
In the wake of Vandire's downfall, Sebastian Thor was declared the 292 nd Ecclesiarch and the Imperium began the long process of rebuilding. Perhaps the most sweeping of changes Thor instigated affected the military forces over which the Ministorum held sway. What remained of the Frateris Templars was disbanded, under the terms of the so-called Decree Passive , which forbade the Adeptus Ministorum from controlling any "men under arms."
Never again would the Ecclesiarchy threaten the continued rule of the Administratum. The Brides, after resuming their original title of Daughters of the Emperor, were at a loss as to what their purpose should be after this event, and so the Ecclesiarchy took the opportunity to recruit and indoctrinate them into the ranks of the Minostorum's military forces. Due to their all-female membership, the Daughters of the Emperor did not technically break the ban and thus, the Ecclesiarchy was able to circumvent the Decree Passive's strictures, even if the spirit of Thor's decree was rather blatantly disregarded.
This newly formed military force was renamed the Orders Militant of the Adepta Sororitas. The Sisterhood became true defenders of the faith and a very physical reminder of the power of the Ecclesiarchy. Trained to the highest levels possible for normal humans and possessed of a phenomenal faith in the God-Emperor of Mankind, the Sisters would go on to engage in Wars of Faith , bringing the light of the Emperor to parts of the galaxy that had fallen into darkness.
During the first years of the Sisterhood's existence, Alicia Dominica, who founded the Orders Militant at Thor's behest, led wars of faith against the alien invaders that had exploited the Imperium's weakness during the Reign of Blood. Silvana , Mina , Lucia , Katherine and Arabella -- those Sisters who had joined her before the Golden Throne -- accompanied Dominica.
Under their combined leadership, the Sororitas were filled with a righteousness of purpose that the Imperium had not witnessed since the legendary days of the Great Crusade . Countless enemies fell as the armies of the Sororitas brought the divine judgement of the Ecclesiarchy to the farthest corners of the galaxy, and to this day, the Sisters of Battle have stood as faithful and loyal defenders of the Ecclesiarchy, and the Imperium.
Convocation of Nephilim
During Thor's Reformation, another organisation came into being at the end of the Age of Apostasy -- the Ordo Hereticus . Formed initially by the Inquisition to ensure that such a calamity as the Age of Apostasy could never again befall the Imperium, its remit soon expanded to cover not just doctrinal heresy against the Imperial Creed , but genetic and psychic divergence from baseline Humanity among the Imperial population as well.
Soon after the formation of the Orders Militant, the masters of the Ordo Hereticus and the highest ranked sisters of the Adepta Sororitas signed the "Convocacion of Nephilim," a document that bound the Sisterhood to the Ordo Hereticus as its Chamber Militant .
The exact details of this agreement have never been revealed, but some believe it to be linked to the knowledge imparted to Alicia Dominica and her companions before the Golden Throne . That such knowledge could be so dire as to bind the two organisations so formally is testament to the weight of the task with which the Adepta Sororitas and the Ordo Hereticus are burdened.
Others believe that the Convocation was intended to curb the power of the Ecclesiarchy, exploiting the fact that the Sororitas are a loyal and zealous force that could be used to enforce the agendas of the newly formed Ordo, thus the Inquisition's willingness to turn a blind eye to the Ecclesiarchy's violation of the spirit of the Decree Passive .
Whatever the truth, those who seek it without the blessing of the highest-ranking members of either organisation will find only a slow and painful death in the deepest excruciation chambers of the Ordo Hereticus, or a fiery, yet equally painful end at the hands of the Orders Militant of the Adepta Sororitas.
Wars of Faith
Organisation
In the 41st Millennium , the Adepta Sororitas is part of the Ecclesiarchy and is divided into two convents. The Convent Prioris is located on Terra , and the Convent Sanctorum is based on the Shrine World of Ophelia VII , and each is led by a sister with the rank of prioress . The overall commander and spiritual leader of the entire Sisterhood and all its myriad orders is the abbess sanctorum , whose seat is on Holy Terra. As the recognised leader of the Adepta Sororitas, the abbess sanctorum is sometimes elected to join the ranks of the High Lords of Terra , while at other times she is subservient to the commands of the reigning ecclesiarch .
The Convents of the Sisterhood are organised into several orders. Each order follows the same basic hierarchical structure:
Hierarchy
The organisation and structure of the Adepta Sororitas
Unlike the many Chapters of the Adeptus Astartes , the Sisterhood is united into a single organisation with a centralised ruling body.
The overall head of the Adepta Sororitas holds the rank of abess or abbess sanctorum , and is elected from and by the leaders of all the Orders. Beneath the abbess sanctorum are two prioresses , one leading each Convent, and below these, the canonesses superior of each individual Order.
There exists a hierarchy of sorts amongst these leaders, though to outsiders it is highly arcane and ritualistic and based on a system of precedence. Orders that were established by "Ecclesiarchal Writ" are ranked higher in the order of precedence than those that were formed by a group splitting off from a preexistent order. This is especially visible in the six Orders Militant Majoris, each of which has spawned dozens of far smaller Lesser Orders Militant, the canonesses superior of which rank lower in the order of precedence than those of their parent organisation.
The canonesses superior are aided in their duties by their order's palatines . These are highly experienced and capable officers, from whose ranks the next canoness superior will be drawn.
It is the palatines that often lead Missions in the field, whether the Order is an Order Militant fighting the enemies of Mankind, or an Order Hospitaller establishing a hospital at the front lines.
Below the palatines are essentially the non-commisioned officers known as the sisters superior , who lead or supervise groups of their sisters in whatever tasks the Order in question is focussed upon.
Members of the Adepta Sororitas can and do transfer from one Order to another, depending on their own unique skills and experience. In particular, a sister of an Order Militant may eventually transfer to a non-militant Order to carry on the Emperor's work should age or injury render her less effective a warrior.
Furthermore, it is not unheard of for a senior member of the Sisterhood to transfer to another organisation entirely; several canonesses are known to have become Inquisitors , one a cardinal palatine and one even a Rogue Trader .
Specialist Formations
Ranks of the Adepta Sororitas
Command Ranks
Standard Ranks
Orders Militant Tactical Specialisations
Orders Famulous and Dialogous Ranks
Recruitment
" It is not enough to serve the Emperor, or even to love Him. You must give to Him all that you had, all you have, and all you shall ever have. You must give yourself over utterly and entirely to His divine will and become a vessel of that will. Only then is your sacrifice fitting. "
The majority of recruits into the Adepta Sororitas are drawn from the Schola Progenium , having been identified by the Drill Abbesses of those Imperial orphanages as suitable candidates from an early age.
A few may be transferred from outside organisations, in particular the ranks of the servants of the Inquisition, although this is relatively unusual and only undertaken following lengthy consideration.
Having been identified as a candidate for membership, the individual is shipped to one of the two primary convents on Terra or Ophelia VII , where she will be subjected to a lengthy and arduous regime of testing as a novice intended to gauge her suitability to join the Sisterhood and to identify which of the Orders she would be most suited to.
Regardless of which Order she will eventually join, all novices undergo extensive instruction in the traditions of the Adepta Sororitas, and most receive at least a modicum of military instruction.
Once a novice is judged worthy to join the Sisterhood, swear her vows to the Emperor and has completed her basic training, the candidates are gathered in the great hall of the convent before the canonesses and palatines of the Orders to which they will be assigned.
Such gatherings range from grand ceremonies involving several thousand new sisters and taking several solar days and nights to conclude, to smaller events where only a handful of candidates gather in the great hall.
One by one, the name of each candidate and the Order she will join is announced, and the newly elevated sister will be led off to begin her vocation.
Once she is assigned to her Order, the sister will begin a period of even more rigorous training and indoctrination, which, it is said, will never end until she sits in death at the right hand of the Emperor.
Orders of the Adepta Sororitas
Orders Majoris
A Living Saint leads the Sisters of Battle into combat against the enemies of the Emperor of Mankind
The famed Orders Militant or Sisters of Battle of the Adepta Sororitas pursue the ways of war to spread the Emperor's light.
The Orders Militant are often tasked by the Ecclesiarchy with defending its Shrine and Cardinal Worlds or retaking such planets from Heretics , xenos or the blasphemous forces of Chaos . There are literally dozens of different Orders Militant, with their convents scattered across the galaxy.
The Sisters of Battle are also often attached to the Ordo Hereticus of the Imperial Inquisition and indeed serve the Witch Hunters as their Chamber Militant . Battle-sisters are recruited solely from the female progena or graduates of the Schola Progenium facilities spread across the galaxy.
They are the orphans of those Imperial servants who have given their lives in the service of the Imperium, either in the Astra Militarum or some other Imperial Adepta.
While being raised within the Schola they receive a strong Ecclesiarchy upbringing and education, coming to regard the Emperor as their spiritual father. Progena recruited into the Sisterhood are indoctrinated even further with the strict orthodox doctrines of the Imperial Creed , becoming ever more fiercely devoted to the Emperor and the Imperial cause.
Their duty as part of the Sisterhood is to ensure and enforce the physical and spiritual purity of Humanity and the departments of the Adeptus Terra .
As they share much the same role within the Imperium as the Ordo Hereticus, battle-sisters often form a major part of Ordo Hereticus military forces when a Witch Hunter does not wish to commandeer the forces of the Astra Militarum into his or her service to carry out a military objective.
There are six Orders Militant Majoris in the Adepta Sororitas that are widely recognised across the Imperium:
Other Sororitas Orders are not combat-oriented per se and pursue less violent activities such as the copying, study of and commentary upon the Imperial Creed 's scriptures, preaching, tending to the sick and injured, educating the young and maintaining the spiritual loyalty and health of the Imperium's various powerful noble families.
Note: It is unknown which Convent the Order of the Quiet Sorrow belongs to.
Orders Minoris
Besides the more well-known militant Orders Majoris of the Adepta Sororitas there is also an unknown number of militant Orders Minoris whose functions are widely unknown. Since their inception, the Orders Militant Majoris have established a number of subsidiary convents throughout the galaxy at sites that are significant to the Ecclesiarchy .
Sometimes little more than minor garrisons, some of these bases have developed identities distinct from their parent orders over time, eventually becoming separate orders all together. The better-known Orders Minoris include:
There are scores, perhaps even hundreds more non-militant orders within the Adepta Sororitas, the vast majority of which are unknown to the bulk of Mankind . The following are only a few known examples:
Notable Sisters of Battle
Wargear
" The strength of Man dwells in our purity of our minds and bodies, within the potency of our weapons and the might of our starships. Most of all, it is found in the righteousness of our cause and our unshakeable faith in the eternal God-Emperor. "
A Battle-Sister stands arrayed in her fearsome panoply of war.
The primary individual weapon of the Orders Militant of the Adepta Sororitas is the Boltgun . Weapon specialists like Dominions and Retributors tend to use flame and heat-based weapons such as Flamers and Multi-meltas , and other weapons with a purifying spiritual effect. Battle-Sisters use a form of modified Power Armour in battle -- however, since they lack the Black Carapace gene-seed organ implant of the Space Marines , they cannot interface with the armour to the same degree as the Astartes and thus are somewhat less mobile in combat. The Sisters of Battle also make use of very strong faith-based powers in battle, which may or may not be related to the psychic powers of the Warp . The Sisters believe these abilities are granted by the divine will of the Emperor himself, though they are more likely the psychic manifestations of the Sisters' incredible faith and devotion to him, as the Immaterium is shaped by belief. The most common wargear worn by all Sisters of Battle includes:
Optional Wargear
Adepta Sororitas Vehicles
A Sororitas Rhino of the Order of Our Martyred Lady .
Sanctorum Pattern Immolator Battle Tank of the Order of the Valorous Heart .
An Exorcist of the Order of the Blue Robe .
A Penitent Engine in battle.
Ecclesiarchy Relics
Ecclesiarchy Relics are items of incredible rarity, holy artefacts and revered tools of destruction that the Ecclesiarchy will go to any lengths to recover and protect. Such is their spiritual provenance that they are powerful weapons in the hands of the faithful, and in extreme circumstances they will be entrusted to the warriors of the Adeptus Ministorum. Only one each of the following relics can be chosen per army:
Canon Conflicts
Until the release of Warhammer 40,000 2nd Edition's Codex: Sisters of Battle , the Convent Sanctorum was described as being on Terra , with the Convent Prioris on Ophelia IV. In the 2nd Edition Codex, Gav Thorpe reverses the locations of the Convents; he also changed the name of Ophelia IV to Ophelia VII.
The following statement comes from the Codex: Sisters of Battle (2nd Edition): "A sign of the Sisters' strength is the fact that in their entire history only a single Sister, Miriael Sabathiel , has fallen to the lure of Chaos. How Miriael fell is unknown, only that she was turned from the Emperor's light to Slaanesh worship, and now serves as one of the Prince of Chaos' greatest warriors."
However this is clearly contradicted by the graphic novel, Daemonifuge , in which a Sister was seduced by a Navigator (who had been corrupted by a daemonic servant of Slaanesh ) and several Sisters were completely corrupted by a Keeper of Secrets , a Greater Daemon of Slaanesh. In the novel Cain's Last Stand , it is also stated that an entire Mission of Sisters were seen engaging Imperial forces alongside Chaos Cultists and Cain was also confronted by two Sisters under daemonic influence. Those Sisters, however, were suffering from mind control and when these two were freed, they immediately killed themselves.
Videos
Sources
Gallery