" The path of the Omnissiah has left humanity dithering in the darkness, incapable of advancing on the paths of knowledge. Embracing the warp reveals technology that the primitives on Mars could never dream of wielding. "
Icon of the Dark Mechanicum, combining the traditional Cog Mechanicum of the ancient Mechanicum with the Star of Chaos.
The Dark Mechanicum , also sometimes referred to incorrectly as the Dark Mechanicus , and who refer to themselves as the " New Mechanicum " or the " True Mechanicum ", is a sect of traitorous Tech-priests , members of the Collegia Titanica and Chaos Knights of the ancient Mechanicum who have since become Hereteks in service to Chaos .
They willingly swore their loyalty to the Warmaster Horus and the Chaos Gods as the Great Crusade came to a close and the terrible galactic conflict known as the Horus Heresy erupted in the early 31st Millennium.
After the Horus Heresy ended in a pyrrhic victory for the Imperium, the traitorous forces of Chaos that had served the Warmaster were driven towards the Eye of Terror during the brutal military campaigns remembered as the Great Scouring .
The Renegade Tech-priests of the so-called Dark Mechanicum were also driven from Mars by the resurgent Loyalists amongst the newborn Adeptus Mechanicus .
These Renegades fled the Imperium into the far corners of the galaxy and some also took refuge in the Eye of Terror. Over the centuries, their ranks have been swelled by those Hereteks of the later Mechanicus who choose to follow their foul path into forbidden tech-heresy.
In exile, the Dark Mechanicum became even more enthralled to the power of the Warp and heretical technologies.
Contents
History
A God Incarnate
Alternate icon of the Dark Mechanicum
When the Age of Strife came to an end in the 30th Millennium , the Emperor of Mankind was determined to bring to fruition His future plans for Human unity in a very hostile galaxy . He knew the time had come to unite all of Humanity under one banner after the destructive birth of the Chaos God Slaanesh in the 30th Millennium reopened the galaxy to Warp travel and communication.
With the use of genetically-modified warriors of the Imperial Army and the Thunder Warriors who presaged the development of the first Space Marines , He quickly rose to dominance on Old Earth , uniting the once-divided nations of Mankind's birthplace during the Unification Wars . He then set His sights on the wider galaxy, and with His newly-created Space Marine Legions at the forefront of His great expeditionary fleets , the Emperor launched His Great Crusade out into the void.
When the Emperor had first come to Mars seeking an alliance between His regime and the powerful Cult Mechanicus , the Tech-priests had recognised a kindred spirit; a man of science who valued the power of machines and technological advancement. As word of the "technological divinity" of this strange golden warrior reached the wider populace of Mars after the Emperor's first arrival at the Red Planet atop the mountain of Olympus Mons, some Tech-priests even began to equate the Emperor with the physical embodiment within the universe of their own Machine God -- the Omnissiah .
The Emperor forged an alliance in 739.M30 with the ancient Mechanicum through the Treaty of Mars -- an alliance of two empires that marked the true foundation of the Imperium of Man . In return for supplying the needed materiel for His armies and building a mighty warfleet in the orbital shipyards of Mars' Ring of Iron for His crusade to reunite the stars, the Emperor promised to protect the Tech-priests and respect the autonomy of their Forge Worlds and their freedom to continue to practice their faith. This was a protection offered despite the official atheism of the Imperial Truth that the Emperor intended to promulgate across all the other worlds of the newborn Imperium.
Dissension in the Ranks
For the masses of Mars , the Omnissiah was now a tangible being, a golden figure who had trod the red surface of Mars. But a small minority among the Tech-priests believed that the Emperor was nothing more than a false god who had enslaved the Martian Priesthood to His will with lies. This bitter resentment, harboured over the next two Terran centuries, would fester below the surface, until such time when this rancorous hatred would boil over into a terrible rebellion against the authority of this false god.
This small sect of dissenters believed the Emperor purposely came to Mars in the guise of the Omnissiah, albeit a false god who came at the head of an army of conquest. The peace that the Emperor had offered the Mechanicum was illusory, a conceit designed to conceal a darker truth. These dissenters believed that the Emperor offered peace with one hand whilst keeping a dagger behind His back with the other.
In reality, the Emperor's offer was an ultimatum, "Join with me or I will simply take what I need from you." Faced with a choice that was no choice at all, the Tech-priests had been forced to bargain away the autonomy of Mars and see the sacred Red Planet become little better than a vassal world of Terra , Mars' ancient rival for leadership among Mankind during the Age of Technology .
Imminent War
Two Terran centuries passed after the signing of the Treaty of Mars , and the individual known as Kelbor-Hal rose to a position of much prominence within the Mechanicum . He had become the fabricator-general of Mars , the master of the Red Planet 's mightiest forge city , Olympus Mons.
The fact that such an ambitious and duplicitous individual ever rose to prominence and the eventual leadership of the Mechanicum is one of the great tragedies of Imperial history. It is remarkable to Imperial scholars of today that an individual as extraordinarily gifted as Kelbor-Hal could be so wrong-headed as to bring so mighty and august a body as the Mechanicum over to the service of heresy and rebellion.
The fabricator-general knew he should be proud of his accomplishments, for he had uncovered more of the secrets of Humanity's lost technology than any before him and had overseen the longest reign of increasing production quotas in the Mechanicum's history. But pride, like many other emotional responses, had all but vanished as the organic cogitator once housed in his skull had been gradually replaced with synthetic synapses and efficient conduits for logical thought.
The climate on Mars was full of discontent during this tumultuous time in the days just before Horus openly declared his rebellion against the Emperor. There were tense relations between the various Mechanicum magi who governed Mars, with sporadic outbreaks of espionage and violence being committed against the various forge cities that represented the primary sociopolitical units of Mars. There were even unconfirmed suspicions that the various Titan Legions of the Collegia Titanica , the most potent military forces available to the Mechanicum, had already secretly chosen sides in case of a potential conflict.
Rise of the Dark Mechanicum
At the outset of the Horus Heresy , the Warmaster Horus sent Regulus , a Mechanicum representative who had already thrown in his lot with the Warmaster, to Mars to secure the tentative support of the fabricator-general of the Mechanicum for his dreams of rebellion. Kelbor-Hal was skeptical at first, for the Emperor had been brought to his forge over two centuries earlier, and Kelbor-Hal had been forced to bend the knee to Him.
The ruler of the once-lowly Terran techno-barbarian tribes had made empty promises of an equal role in His grand crusade of conquest, but that vaunted equality had never materialised in the fabricator-general's view. The Mechanicum continued to toil in its myriad manufactoria and orbital shipyards across the galaxy's Forge Worlds to provide the Emperor's armies with the needed weapons of war, but received nothing for their efforts but platitudes. Kelbor-Hal knew Horus Lupercal was a warrior of vision, but Kelbor-Hal wanted to know what he could offer in addition to platitudes.
Regulus explained to the fabricator-general that much had happened since the Emperor took His leave of the expeditionary fleets after the success of the Ullanor Crusade and the installation of his favorite son Horus as the Warmaster and his proxy in command of the Great Crusade . He assured Kelbor-Hal that alignments had shifted and that new powers emerged from the shadows, offering their aid to those with the strength of vision to heed them. Horus Lupercal was one such individual, and he was now assuredly a friend of the Mechanicum.
When it came time to strike at the Emperor and His Imperium, Horus guaranteed to be a friend to Mars as long as the fabricator-general gave his loyalty--and his manufacturing capabilities--over to the cause of the Traitors . Horus also required the fabricator-general to quash any dissent amongst his own Tech-priests so that the forces of the Warmaster would be able to launch their bid for supremacy within the Sol System without fear of counterattack. Any factions loyal to Terra must be brought to heel or destroyed before the Warmaster's forces reached the Sol System.
The fabricator-general informed Regulus that the Warmaster had asked much of him and the Mechanicum already. They had already delivered, for they had already ensured that materials and weapons were priority-tasked to those expeditionary fleets of the Great Crusade that the Warmaster favoured and had delayed shipments to those not aligned with him. But the Mechanicum had no desire to trade one autocrat for another.
Regulus assured Kelbor-Hal that the Warmaster pledged to return the Martian Empire to its former glory, and furthermore, he swore to withdraw any non-Mechanicum forces from all of the Forge Worlds after the Emperor had been overthrown. To allay the fabricator-general's misgivings, the Warmaster promised to provide the Mechanicum the lost secrets of ancient Standard Template Construct (STC) technology that had been recovered from the worlds of the recently subjugated Auretian Technocracy by the Warmaster's Sons of Horus Legion .
The fabricator-general was impressed with the Warmaster's gift, and admitted that it was a valuable STC database, but he wanted more. Regulus had anticipated this demand, and told Kelbor-Hal that the Warmaster promised to lift all restrictions on research into those technologies like Abominable Intelligence (A.I.) that the Emperor had declared forbidden. To cement the alliance between the Mechanicum and the Warmaster and display the Traitors' seriousness about their cause, Horus had provided Regulus with the protocols required to unlock the infamous Vaults of Moravec .
The Vaults of Moravec were a repository of forbidden knowledge that the Emperor had ordered sealed two centuries earlier after the signing of the Treaty of Mars, for the vaults contained innumerable artefacts of technology that had been fashioned or corrupted by the malign power of Chaos or were in themselves incredibly dangerous, such as Warp -based weapons and ancient artificial general intelligences like the Men of Iron . Greedily, the fabricator-general struck the dark bargain, accepting Horus' proposal and willingly joined forces with the Warmaster, assisting the Traitors with all of the technology of Mankind at his disposal.
Schism of Mars
Dark Mechanicum forces wage open warfare against the Loyalist Techno-Magi Koriel Zeth , the Mistress of Magma City
When this repository was reopened, there was all manner of forbidden arcane knowledge and weaponry that had obviously been tainted by the corrupting influence of Chaos stored within. Soon the corruption spread throughout the forge cities and temples to the Machine God across the Red Planet as scrap code -- Chaos-contaminated digital source code that was infected with an arcane computer virus -- which infested the logi-stacks and cogitator (computer) archives of the Mechanicum, causing literal Chaos to emerge in any cogitator system that was networked to one of its infected counterparts.
The opening acts of treachery had already occurred, yet Fabricator-General Kelbor-Hal could not openly march to war against the Emperor without the appropriate pretense, providing the excuse to silence his detractors and eliminate his rivals. The fabricator-general and his allies amongst the Renegade Tech-priests who would later be called the "Dark Mechanicum" by their Loyalist foes used the disruption unleashed by the scrap code attack to bide their time and marshal the strength of their forces. Kelbor-Hal and his allies also used the tactics of sabotage and assassination in an attempt to eliminate those who were unwilling to join their cause.
But the opportunity to go openly to war eventually presented itself when the Techno-Magi Koriel Zeth , the Mistress of Magma City, declared that she did not believe the Omnissiah actually existed. This open apostasy from the sacred doctrines of the Cult Mechanicus was the excuse the forces of the Dark Mechanicum needed to finally wage open warfare against their enemies, declaring them to be Heretics and apostates to the faith that had been sacred on Mars for millennia.
Magma City would soon become a focal point in the struggle for those amongst the Mechanicum who remained loyal to the Emperor. Open warfare eventually erupted across the Red Planet as Martian forces, both civilian and military, fought one another in a deadly and escalating civil war known as the Schism of Mars whose destructiveness mirrored that unfolding in the wider galaxy between Loyalist and Traitor forces.
Acts of Treachery
To help the Warmaster Horus achieve his goals, Kelbor-Hal oversaw the construction of the mighty battleship Furious Abyss in the orbital shipyard of Thule , a former asteroid, which had been towed by the Mechanicum into orbit of the gas giant of Jupiter in the Sol System , far beyond prying eyes and questions. This formidable warship was unlike any other of its kind. It was so heavily armoured that it could withstand even a concerted assault from a planetary laser defence battery. It was the greatest and largest vessel ever assembled by Mankind, unique in every way and powerful beyond reckoning.
Kelbor-Hal had sanctioned the construction of such a vessel because it suited his great purpose, namely the burgeoning desire, or rather intrinsic programming, within the servants of the Machine God to gradually become one with their slumbering deity. The Emperor had sought to place restrictions upon the Mechanicum's ability to explore every avenue of knowledge that might lead to a closer unity with the Machine God.
Horus had promised to remove all of those restrictions and perhaps even open new vistas of knowledge for the Mechanicum to explore in the form of his allies amongst the entities of the Warp . Faced with such a choice, the question of Kelbor-Hal's allegiance and that of the Mechanicum factions loyal to him had required mere nanoseconds of computation.
The Furious Abyss had been intended to become the new flagship of the traitorous Word Bearers Legion . None could know of the vessel's existence until it was too late. Steps had been taken to ensure that remained the case. The massive battleship had been created with one deliberate mission in mind: the annihilation of an entire Space Marine Legion . The Word Bearers' ultimate aim as part of the Warmaster's larger plan of conquest was to infiltrate the Realm of Ultramar in the Eastern Fringes of the galaxy and attempt to destroy the Ultramarines Legion and their homeworld of Macragge .
In a final act of treachery, Kelbor-Hal had the Jovian shipyards destroyed once the Furious Abyss was complete. For the workers at the yards there was no time to flee to safety, and there were no survivors. Every Tech-priest , servitor and menial present at the yards was burned to ash. None would discover the massive voidship that had been fabricated upon the asteroid's surface until it was much, much too late.
A great deal of precious technology was lost during Thule's destruction and so it proved to be a steep price for the Traitor elements within the Mechanicum to pay for the absolute and certain secrecy required to bring to fruition the Warmaster's plan to destroy the Ultramarines. But in the end, the fabricator-general's will had been carried out and the Dark Mechanicum played its part in the tragedy that would ultimately unfold on a world called Calth .
Horus Heresy
Loyalist Space Marine forces, including Astartes of the Imperial Fists , Salamanders , Ultramarines and Raven Guard Legions , battle the Tech-priests of the Dark Mechanicum on Mars during the Horus Heresy .
Aside from the Human component in the Traitors ' ranks, the powers of the Mechanicum and their kin were also of great importance to the war. Within the ranks of the burgeoning "Dark Mechanicum," as they became known, could be found powerful elements of the Martian Priesthood, the Ordo Reductor and the Legio Cybernetica , along with many of the feared Myrmidon Destructor Cults and a number of sub-cults which had operated for long years on the edge of tech-heresy , all drawn together by Kelbor-Hal of Mars .
With them had come the support of more than half of the legios of the Adeptus  Titanicus as well as dozens of allied Knight houses , and for much of the Heresy Mars itself was lost to the Loyalists , while the output and military power of Forge Worlds such as Sarum , Voss , Cyclothrathe and Stygies VIII had declared for the Traitors, with others such as Anvilus , Incaladion and Ryza were paralysed by civil war.
Much as with Sarum and Cyclothrathe, other " Renegade " Forge Worlds distrustful of Mars that the Warmaster Horus had enticed into his cause with the lure of petty empire-building and freedom of experimentation, Horus offered new treaties of alliance whose accords the varying ruling Forge Worlds' Mechanicum Synods would find more to their liking than the old.
By this pact these Forge Worlds would serve the Warmaster's "new Imperium" just as it had the old, but where they had been used and bled dry callously in the past by a master who cared nothing for their power or prosperity, under Horus they would flourish and be rewarded.
Gone would be the petty restrictions of the Emperor 's technological edicts -- blocks put in place to avert the spectre of the terrors of Old Night -- and gone would be the dead hand of Machine Cult dogma, if they so desired, so long as they offered up their weapons and war machines to the Traitors' cause with abundance.
The details would prove more torturous and elaborate to finalise, but in secret an agreement was reached, even while in false faith the lords of these Renegade Forge Worlds continued to secretly deal with the Regent of Terra Malcador the Sigillite 's emissaries to the contrary. Many archmagi sought to play one side against the other, right to the bitter end.
The Dark Mechanicum wholeheartedly supported Horus during the start of the Horus Heresy and they participated in the attacks against the Loyalist Space Marine Legions on Isstvan V where they used dark and forbidden knowledge to help destroy the Loyalist Astartes. Later, the Dark Mechanicum, led by Kelbor-Hal, unleashed the terrible civil war upon the Mechanicum known as the Schism of Mars in a bid to restore the autonomy of the Mechanicum from the Imperium of Man .
This effort ultimately failed when Horus was slain at the end of the Horus Heresy during the epic Siege of Terra and the Loyalist elements of the Mechanicum succeeded in driving their Chaos -corrupted brethren from the Red Planet. Many of these so-called Hereteks of the Dark Mechanicum fled into the Eye of Terror alongside the other Traitors after the campaigns of the Great Scouring , when the Imperium recovered most of the territory across the galaxy that had been lost to Horus' Traitor forces.
Post-Heresy
At present, the Tech-priests and Dark Magi of what is now called the Dark Mechanicum, who are considered Hereteks amongst their counterparts in the Cult Mechanicus , have pledged their souls to the worship of the Dark Gods of Chaos . Within the Eye of Terror they continue to service and maintain the war machines and wargear of the Traitor Legions , the Traitor Titan Legions and the other forces of Chaos with equal fervour.
They plumb the depths of secret and forbidden knowledge kept hidden by the Ruinous Powers . Still dedicated to the acquisition of all knowledge in the universe much like their Loyalist counterparts, the Dark Mechanicum believes their uncorrupted brothers and sisters in the Adeptus Mechanicus are fools, for they will never be able to fully comprehend the divinity that is true knowledge if they cut themselves off from the secrets offered by the Dark Gods .
The Tech-adepts of the Dark Mechanicum see the Omnissiah of the Cult Mechanicus as being embodied in the power of Chaos Undivided rather than the Emperor of Mankind . As such, they pledge themselves to the destruction of the God-Emperor, who they believe is a false prophet who has led the rest of their fellows astray.
The members of the Adeptus Mechanicus are horrified by what they view as their Chaos counterparts' tech-heresy , and feel that the Dark Mechanicum's knowledge is a blasphemous affront to the Machine God and His Omnissiah, even as they are always curious to learn more about what their dark brethren are up to...
Beyond the Imperium
The Adeptus Mechanicus hold their darkest hatred for those Renegade forces of their own brethren that turned on them during the Horus Heresy , Traitors who live on to this day as the Dark Mechanicum. The forbidden histories of those terrible days show that the destruction wrought by the Traitors on Mars and in a dozen other spheres of war was unparalleled, and has left a stain on the soul of the Omnissiah 's priesthood that has never been cleansed.
In the aftermath of Horus ' fall, many of the Dark Mechanicum who survived found sanctuary with the various Traitor Legions and in dark corners of the Imperium where their terrible arts have prospered and their undying hatred of the Imperium has festered down through the millennia.
The forbidden psycho-sonic weapons of the Emperor's Children , the gene-atrocities of the hated Fabius Bile , the malign perversion of the techno-viral technology used to create the terrible Obliterators -- all have been laid at the Dark Mechanicum's door. Hellish Forge Worlds bestrode by cyber-daemonic overlords deep within the Eye of Terror ceaselessly churn out the weapons and munitions that arm the forces of Chaos and fuel the dreaded Black Crusades .
The Renegades of the Dark Mechanicum were amongst the first group of those the Imperium branded as " Heretics ," and they willingly fled to the Eye of Terror where they could live forever beyond the Imperium's control. But the Eye of Terror was not the only region of space where these Heretics fled to escape the Imperium's wrath.
Though the Imperium is vast, its authority stretching from rim to rim of the galaxy, in reality there are vast swaths of space that remain hidden from the Emperor 's light. These regions have many names, including but by no means restricted to, the "outlands," " wilderness space ," and the " Halo Stars ." Within them, whole civilisations can rise, prosper, and fall, without once knowing of the wider Imperium that surrounds them.
The Calixis Sector is one such region of space, lying along the edges of the galaxy, an established bastion of Imperial control amongst the hazy borders. However, it is surrounded by regions of space not under Imperial control. The most prominent is the Koronus Expanse in the Halo Stars, linked to the Calixis Sector by a fluctuating Warp passage.
Beyond this passage, Imperial rule ends, and all manner of Human and xenos civilisations exist unknown and undiscovered. However, there are other outlands around the Calixis Sector as well, including the Hazeroth Abyss, the fringes of the Drusus Marches, and the nomad space between the Calixis Sector and the bordering Ixaniad Sector . The Renegades of the Dark Mechanicum tend to be as varied as the regions of space they occupy.
Frequently, Hereteks take the form of extended clans that share their knowledge only through their blood relatives, maintaining a level of understanding about ancient technologies or local Warpspace conditions that astounds outsiders.
The Adeptus Mechanicus is particularly sensitive to the existence of such Hereteks (of which those in the Meritech Clans are a particularly egregious example) and press other Imperial authorities to mobilise and capture or kill them as a matter of priority. Individual Renegades sometimes slip into Imperial space to pursue their trade, but they find it a dangerous place to live. If caught and identified, they are tortured and executed by the Inquisition with no hope of mercy.
Hell-Forges
" Silent in the Calixian extent are worlds from which the Omnissiah has withdrawn His blessings. They trail their parent stars like errant children struck dumb and bloodied. Their ruins are profound, their catacombs endless, their savages sorrowful - for these wards of the Imperium of Mankind have paid a great and terrible price for the tech-heresy of their forbearers. "
Irradial Forge on a Hell-Forge world
There are those servants of Chaos who live beyond the normal ken of mortals within a realm not entirely of the material universe and not entirely of the Warp : a Daemon World where the laws of nature and reason have been completely usurped by the whims of the Ruinous Powers .
Here Daemons roam freely and are constantly nourished by the twisting winds of sorcery as mortals become their playthings with a value only as Chaos Champions or slaves. Daemon Worlds are a sanctuary for the worshippers of Chaos with the means and courage to flee to them. The Inquisition never rests in its efforts to eliminate the devotees of the Dark Gods , but a Daemon World defies even their shadowy reach.
A few Daemon Worlds are dominated by the remnants of the Dark Mechanicum that once followed Horus . These Dark Mechanicum Hell-Forge worlds are wholly given over to Daemon-machines and infernal industries, where mills grind flesh and suffering is the currency used to make the insane visions of their nightmarish masters real. Countless millions are enslaved to work in a world-spanning network of labyrinthine forges, churning out an endless supply of weapons and armaments for the Traitor Legions' Long War against the Imperium.
The masters of these Dark Mechanicum Hell-Forge worlds, most now half-Daemonic machines themselves, have long since left the shreds of their Humanity behind and are beholden to none -- be they mortal or Chaos God . They sell or barter their unholy inventions and arms to the highest bidder, be they warlord, demagogue, Chaos Sorcerer or Daemon Prince without favour, and their coin of exchange is always the same -- new raw materials -- the flesh and souls of slaves for the Dark Forge World's unquenchable hunger.
These fallen Forge Worlds are enclosed in a perpetual blanket of dark grey clouds. Below the clouds is the source: stack after stack of vertical pipes rising even to the lower cloud decks and billowing thick, toxic smoke into the acrid air. No sign of the actual surface can be seen, for all is covered with layered factories, which are burning, creating, and forging night and day (though there are few who can tell the two apart given the atmosphere). Robed figures wander without wasteful delay in their tasks, exposed cloth allowing glimpses of artful mechadendrites or metallic limbs.
Closer examination reveals more of the real nature of these dark worlds. Unhidden, clear to even a casual glance, is the mark of the Ruinous Powers . Runes and glyphs of unholy meaning litter walls, declaring patronage to the Dark Gods. Even the Hereteks carry these marks upon their branded flesh, their allegiance to the Machine God burned away from their synapses. The forges themselves burn with the terrible smells of burning blood and scorched flesh, fed by souls as well as promethium and low-grav alloys of steel.
The blessed Cog Mechanicum is gone, instead there are leering metal skulls in a circlet of spiked teeth. But the worst thing is that there is no proper, logical structure to the world. Forge cities rise in random fashion, lurching towards the skies and deep into the planetary crust at the whims of their Dark Magi lords.
Tech-Heresy
Hereteks
A Heretek and her willing Dark Adept
Because of the nature of their split from the Imperium , these fallen Tech-priests lack a central authority or consistent belief structure. As a result, their reigning ideology is far more diverse than that of their former brethren within the Adeptus Mechanicus . Hereteks may shun the Omnissiah entirely as a false god, worship Him as an extension of Chaos , or simply ignore their former beliefs to focus solely on their research.
Even among the unusually open-minded Explorators of the Adeptus Mechanicus, there are subjects which must be avoided at all cost to remain true to the dictates of the Machine God . A Heretek enthusiastically violates all such strictures, exploring xenos technology, archeotech from the Dark Age of Technology , and dabbling in all facets of technology related to the manipulation of the Warp. He may even be bold enough to develop entirely new technologies, combining components in forbidden manners to produce the ultimate tech-heresy for many in the Cult Mechanicus -- innovation.
He may go as far as sharing the tools of his trade and the secrets of its ways with those who have not been trained in the mysteries of the Machine God. A Heretek actively seeks out new technology and continuously experiments with new techniques in ways that were once forbidden. He no longer believes that any information, experiment, or device can be ignored. Rather, he deliberately focuses on those technologies that the Mechanicus' teachings once taught him to avoid, with a particular interest in developing Warp -based technologies.
Few inquiries concerning technology are beyond a Heretek's interest, though inevitably many of his inventions and much of his research tend towards the development of tools of destruction. As he builds these weapons for his fellow devotees, the Heretek has also invariably rebuilt his own body. It may be that he has few organic components left and those that remain are often marked by the mutational "gifts" of the Chaos Gods. His cybernetic and sometimes biological enhancements not only improve his technological acumen, they also grant him additional abilities in combat. A Heretek is likely to be much physically hardier as well as much more powerfully armed than even the highest-ranking Magos of the Mechanicus.
Some in the Imperium think of those referred to as Hereteks to be a unified force, like the Adeptus Mechanicus itself. This is not the case, as there is no galaxy -spanning organisation dedicated to tech-heresy , including the Dark Mechanicum, which is often treated erroneously as being a monolithic entity like the adepta from which it schismed.
Rather, there are countless fiefdoms and Dark Forge Worlds , each ruled by a fallen magos (or several magi ) powerful enough to dominate cadres of their fellows and enslave Mechanicum thralls and servants. Just like the warbands of the Traitor Legions and almost all the other servants of Chaos, the corrupt Tech-priests war amongst each other, or prefer to exist aloof from their fellow servants of the Dark Gods .
Hereteks often follow a path of constant innovation. A Heretek may be capable of drawing power for their devices directly from the Warp and controlling them with summoned Warp entities. They might dabble with concepts of artificial general intelligence , memory transference, or even attempt to capture and preserve the souls of intelligent beings within their devices through their arcane knowledge of the Warp.
Many of these inventors mindlessly hew to the idea that the new and the novel is always preferable in accomplishing a given end than established techniques. For them, the joy of a new idea or the recovery of an unknown bit of knowledge is a triumph, even if that idea has already been made obsolete. With each new advancement, their passion for further such successes grows as does their appetite for ever more knowledge, regardless of its source.
The Heretek is often driven by their hunger for knowledge and is quite willing to use the Ruinous Powers and their Daemonic servants as a source. At other times, they seek out xenos technology and archeotech . They may even coordinate raids upon Imperial strongholds for the sole purpose of recovering their records of where such devices can be found.
In many Hereteks' minds, there is no greater purpose in life than serving the cause of the advancement of technology and knowledge. Any sacrifice is justified in the pursuit of this end.
It is relatively rare for a Heretek to be raised by the Dark Gods as a Daemon Prince . All too often, Hereteks end up as a component of one of their own inventions, with too little left of the original body or its personality to even receive such a reward from the Dark Gods. However, those few who are granted this gift continue to spread their Chaos-tainted technology across the galaxy.
Heretek Savants
" ++No Secutor, you may not move++ Even now conduction filaments are piercing your neural systems and unworthy flesh++ So they sent you to find me, did they?++ To carry out the Omnissiah’s judgment on me? ++ Well you found me —or more accurately I found you, foolish puppet of meat and iron ++ Well, now you will dance on my strings not theirs ++ Ah yes, your last paltry defences fall++ In a way I envy you; in a moment you will experience the most exquisite of agonies as I rip apart and overwrite your synapses one-by-one, it should be quite the experience++ Now Secutor, open wide, Here…I… Am. "
A Heretek Savant performing an illicit experiment upon an unfortunate victim.
The strictures and dictates of the Adeptus Mechanicus are many and harsh; they form a labyrinthine and iron-clad code that defines every aspect of the lives of the Omnissiah 's priesthood, including their outlook and practices. Their purpose is as simple as it is unwavering: to control and regulate knowledge and its use, stifle blasphemous innovation, and above all maintain the Cult Mechanicus ' stranglehold on the Imperium 's technology.
To become a Heretek Savant by that phrase's purest definition is to abandon this code, at least in the Tech-priest 's private thoughts. It is to embrace individual innovation, experimentation, and free will and stray from the path ordained by the teachings of the Archmagos Doctrinal. For a Tech-priest to do so is every bit as rare, as radical and heretical as a Confessor of the Adeptus Ministorum straying from the Imperial Creed , and the consequences for those that do stray, should their deviation be discovered, is every bit as harsh.
Although rather than a pyre, Heretek Savants can look forward to having their cybernetic implants ripped bodily from them while alive and whatever meat that remains useful recycled into servitor components to pay for their sins against the Machine God .
Heretek Savants can come to their Renegade position for a variety of reasons, the most common of which includes the simple exercising of their free will away from the structured environments of the Machine God's domains. Such tech-heresy is particularly prevalent among those Tech-priests who serve in the Explorator cadres or are assigned to the Inquisition 's service.
The consequences of self-reliance and forced adaptation in the field away from help can affirm the Omnissian faith for some Tech-priests, but for others it can lead them increasingly to question and to innovate in order to overcome adversity and seek their own answers. Others come to tech-heresy for darker reasons, such as personal ambition and the obsessive quest for power and knowledge which will allow them no respite and lead them to increasingly rail against the narrow confines of the Cult Mechanicus' approved technologies and patterns.
Regardless, the path of tech-heresy is a dangerous one and as perilous in its own way as tampering with the powers of the Warp . Exposure to the artefacts and lore of the alien and the technological sins of Humanity 's ancient past can be every bit as corrupting, both for the body and the soul.
Secrecy is as vital for Heretek Savants as for any other whose knowledge and actions would condemn them in the eyes of the Imperium because discovery will lead to sanction and destruction by the power of the Cult Mechanicus. This usually leads to a slow distancing of themselves from their fellows in the Mechanicus and a deep-seated paranoia of discovery.
As a result, Heretek Savants rapidly gain a merciless and suspicious streak centred on their own self-preservation, increasingly favour implanting (often heretical) weaponry and defensive systems into their own bodies, and will stop at nothing in the service of the Quest for Knowledge .
Becoming a Heretek Savant is a matter of choice and opportunity rather than induction into a secret cult or service to a master, and all that is needed is for the Tech-priest to turn their back on the sacred doctrines of the Omnissiah and have the will and capability to do so.
From this point on, they risk censure and destruction by the Cult Mechanicus if their heresies are discovered, and while there is nothing to stop them furthering their rank and position in the Adeptus Mechanicus, they are forever more false of heart and must remain eternally vigilant.
Arch-Hereteks
" Those fools and their talk of spirits and rites; technology is cause and consequence, mechanism and effect, and should not be so restrained and mishandled as those red-robed simpletons would believe. "
An Arch-Heretek of the Dark Mechanicum
Within the Eye of Terror and many parts of the Halo Stars there exist those who defy the dictates and traditions of the Adeptus Mechanicus , choosing to experiment with technology and try to understand how it works without the sanction of the Cult Mechanicus . Condemned as techno-heretics, or Hereteks , these individuals are hunted for their blasphemous acts, and shown no mercy should they be caught.
Many of these individuals flock together for mutual protection and the benefits of their illicit studies. Such groups often find that the employ of pirates and smugglers grants them the freedom and mobility they need to survive, and the opportunity to work with advanced machinery beyond the gaze of the Mechanicus.
Over the years, certain Hereteks have arisen in the Koronus Expanse accompanied by tales of infamous actions. Their sinister reputations have generated a collective moniker amongst the low-born populaces from Footfall to Damaris. Now in the Expanse a fallen Tech-priest of sufficient skill and infamy is likely to be labelled an "Arch-Heretek" by the populace.
Though there are no set criteria for what makes an Arch-Heretek, they are often a match for true Tech-priests and Explorators in terms of their understanding and proficiency with machines. The greatest of them were once Tech-priests themselves, now turned from the worship of the Omnissiah. Arch-Hereteks are highly valued by void-faring criminals, both for their expertise in all things technical and their unique abilities.
Notable Hereteks
The traitorous fabricator-general of Mars , Kelbor-Hal
Master Adept Lukas Chrom
Ancient Remembrancer sketch of the infamous Archmagos Yelav Draykavac
Master Adept Urtzi Malevolus
Heretek Etolph Cycerin
Heretek Illucis Grizvaldi
Magos Phayzarus, the Perjurer
Arch-Heretek Nomen Ryne
Heretek Savant Cyyrik Scayl
The infamous Heretek Magos Vathek
Notable Heretek Cults
Forbidden Arts of Dark Technology
The fundamental tenet of Hereteks is the acquisition of power through unrestrained technological advancement. The great arrogance and sin of this work is as obvious as it is dangerous to anyone who believes in the Cult Mechanicus or the Imperial Creed , and it would lead Mankind back to the terrors of the Age of Strife if it were allowed to bear fruit.
Here are but a few examples of the dark paths down which forbidden technology might wander and the legends that cloak them:
Dark Tech
" The Dark Age of Technology casts its echoes upon us, softened with time, but foul yet. Beware the machine, for its lineage is unhallowed. "
Dark Tech is the tool of Hereteks , comprising forbidden techlore and machine-patterns that defile the Omnissiah 's gifts, imperil the soul, and taint the sacred form of Mankind . Servants of the Inquisition recognise many forms of Dark Tech: Warpmachines built by outcast Enginseers of the Machine Cult; perversions of cogitation; tech-sorcery that corrupts worlds; the myriad sins of various Heretek Renegades ; and others.
Yet it is the rare and dedicated Monodominant Inquisitor who is willing to burn errant device-patterns alongside the Hereteks who use them. The Inquisition must understand its enemies, and so the lore of tech-heresy flows into the sealed vaults of the Holy Ordos.
There it lurks, a temptation for Radical Inquisitors -- for Dark Tech is imbued with great power. At first it is power enough to reveal vital secrets, divine the right choice in matters of life and death, or utterly destroy enemies of the Imperium. In the end it is power enough to corrupt a Radical's soul, and make of them that which they once hunted.
Ranged Weapons
Apostatic Matrix
Callophean Psy-Engine
Empyric Conduit-Blade
Heretek Technologies
" The heretic's weapons are lies and deceipt. What are they, against faith in the Emperor? "
Immateria Ward
Irradial Cogitator
Samech Redemption Servitor
Dark Mechanicum Rituals
Maltek Incarna
Not all Chaos rituals are matters of what might be considered "pure Warpcraft." There also exists a dark and forbidden strain of technological lore which deals in the manipulation of the Warp long proscribed by the Adeptus Mechanicus.
This corrupted science lurks as a nightmarish shadow that perverts the empirical understanding of the universe with the insane Maltek Incarna of the Dark Mechanicum. Such Incarna, though blessedly rare, are every bit as dangerous as a Chaos Sorcerer 's summonings and often far more insidious, able to corrupt signals, possess circuits, mutate metal, and sunder physical laws in terrifying patterns.
A Goleph
Slinnar War Machine, and its unfortunate victim
A Bronze Malifect
A Maletek Stalker
An unfortunate Tech-adept falls victim to a Schismatical
Occult Artefacts
Sources
Gallery