" All theatres are theatres of war. War must needs be theatrical. "
Rune of the Aeldari Lexicon designating the Harlequins.
A Harlequin , known in the Aeldari Lexicon as a Rillietann , is a member of a very distinct sub-group of the Aeldari species who belongs to none of the existing Aeldari factions, including the Asuryani of the craftworlds , the Exodites or the Drukhari of Commorragh . They are the keepers of the Black Library and serve the enigmatic Aeldari deity called the Laughing God .
The Harlequins see no distinction between art and war, and their outlook can best be explained by reference to the legend of the Fall of the Aeldari ; one of their self-appointed duties is to keep this legend alive through their performances. The central figure of Harlequin belief is Cegorach , the Great Harlequin -- also known as the Laughing God.
None truly know how this strange being survived the birth of Slaanesh where the other gods of the Aeldari Pantheon did not. However, every Harlequin is firm in the belief that Cegorach escaped into the bounds of the Webway , existing there still behind myriad disguises and mocking She Who Thirsts from behind the veil.
A Harlequin troupe master
The Laughing God is the only authority that the Harlequins recognise, and their every deed is thought to be in furtherance of his own inscrutable agenda. Harlequins are undeniably part of the Aeldari species, yet they owe no allegiance to any given Asuryani craftworld or Drukhari kabal , a kindred apart from their fellows.
These enigmatic warriors are often credited with supernatural powers, and many amongst both Asuryani and Drukhari society believe that the Harlequins know most, if not all, of the secret paths through the endless maze of the Webway.
They are welcomed by all of the other Aeldari kindreds, including the Drukhari of Commorragh and the other Webway satellite realms, and are known for their brightly coloured clothing, incredible agility (even for an Aeldari), and use of unusually powerful weapons. Harlequins always organise themselves into groups they call "troupes," which are led by a leader known as a " troupe master ."
Contents
History
A pair of Aeldari Harlequin Players unleashing the Dance of Death against their foes
Fall of the Aeldari
Millennia have passed since the ancient Aeldari fell into shadow, yet still the memory of their glory burns bright. Like the stars in the sky they shone, illuminating the endless void. Theirs was the power to create, and also to destroy, for they held the secrets of the universe in their hands. Yet with power unchecked came monstrous pride. The cessation of toil raised the spectre of ennui, alongside the endless freedom to explore the slightest whim. Curiosity became obsession, then excess and decadence, until eventually a rot took root in the soul of the Aeldari species.
In their arrogance, the ancient Aeldari abandoned their gods, turning their backs upon the morals and codes that guided their civilisation. Divested of their ancient pantheon, many Aeldari declared themselves divine. Pleasure cults spread through the Aeldari Empire , each more twisted and perverse than the last.
Against the lurid glare of now, the glories of old were spat upon as pale, unworthy things. In the face of this wanton madness, the old gods could do nothing. Bloody-handed Khaine raged. Vaul the Smith turned his back, while Mother Isha wept oceans of tears. Even Asuryan the Creator looked on powerless. Only Cegorach seemed uncaring, for he merely laughed at the Aeldari's foolishness.
A female Harlequin Player -- one of the Children of Cegorach , the Laughing God
This plunge into depravity would prove the downfall of the ancient Aeldari. So twisted had their race become, so lost to hedonism and corruption, that a new god was birthed into the Warp in their image. This was Slaanesh , the Dark Prince, known to the Aeldari as " She Who Thirsts ," and she would be the doom of the species who had made her.
Three fragments of the Aeldari species escaped before this cataclysm occurred. First to flee were the Exodites . Deaf to the mockery of their perverted kin, they eschewed the trappings of power that they might save their very souls. Next went those who would become the Drukhari . Unrepentant yet wary, they had committed their darkest excesses in the labyrinth dimension of the Webway , and were thus protected by its innate psychic defences when Slaanesh was born.
Last to escape were the Craftworld Asuryani . Fashioning great interstellar arks to bear them to safety, they fled into the void, and a denial of all they had become. At the instant of her birth, Slaanesh opened wide her yawning maw, rending reality itself as she gave vent to a scream of unimaginable power. All but a fraction of the ancient Aeldari were killed in that moment, their souls blasted from their bodies and greedily devoured.
As the Aeldari fell, so too did their ancestral gods, consumed by She Who Thirsts. All Aeldari know the tale of the Fall. Yet not all know that, when the Aeldari fled their doom, they took with them the seeds of Cegorach's vengeance. These individuals, the worshippers of the Laughing God , would find bloody purpose in the years to come.
Ghosts of the Webway
A depiction of the Aeldari Laughing God Cegorach , divine patron of the Harlequin and one of the few survivors of the Aeldari Pantheon of gods after the birth of Slaanesh .
The Harlequins are lightning-fast warrior acrobats. These enigmatic beings do not differentiate between war and art, applying their lithe, inhuman grace to both without distinction. Sinister, mysterious and mercurial, they wage a never-ending guerrilla war against the servants of the Ruinous Powers in the name of their Laughing God. Harlequins are the strangest and most inscrutable of all the Aeldari race. Their mastery of the physical arts, twinned with their incredible speed, makes the Harlequins truly deadly fighters. Every moment is a performance, and they perform their legendary masques with puissant skill, flair and passion –- their hallmarks upon the field of battle.
The Harlequins are nomads, their warrior bands treading the secret paths of the labyrinthine realm known as the Webway . Since the Fall, they have waged their clandestine war against She Who Thirsts. Who can know what horrors might have been wrought upon the galaxy without the constant vigilance of the Harlequins? These mysterious figures strike suddenly, killing with such speed and skill that they often vanish back into the Webway without any but their foes ever knowing they were there. The populations of whole systems -- sometimes entire species -- have been spared the horrors of daemonic incursion without ever knowing the threat they might have faced.
Alongside death-dealing, the Harlequins possess another, ritual duty: they travel between the realms of their divided kin -- the craftworlds, the Exodite worlds and the dark city of Commorragh -- performing the dances and plays of the Aeldari mythic cycle. Viewed with superstitious awe, these ritual performances remind the Aeldari of the gods they once knew and of the Fall of their ancient race, ensuring that their people retain some semblance of racial unity. Indeed, when war calls and the day is sufficiently dark, the Harlequins often broker temporary alliances between their Commorrite and craftworld kin.
Theatre of War
" All their wars are merry, and all their songs are sad. "
A Harlequin troupe unleashing their fury against Daemonettes of Slaanesh
Swift beyond belief and impossibly agile, Harlequins flow through battle like silk streamers in a hurricane. As they close with the foe, the Players are in constant motion, a riot of prismatic colour that dazzles the senses. The oncoming Harlequins sprint, leap and weave, the blades and blasts of their terrified enemy whistling around them to little effect.
Harlequins in battle prefer to rely upon speed and skill over brute strength and resilience. Their holo-suits shatter the wearer's outline into a fractal, polychromatic blur, causing each Harlequin to appear as an insubstantial storm of psychedelic colour into which the panicked foe pour their fire to no avail. At the moment of lethal impact, however, the Harlequins prove all too real. The thunder of gunfire is their backbeat, the screams of the dying their accompaniment as they whirl through the enemy ranks.
Every step of the battle is like a dance, each victim as much an unwilling partner as a mortal foe. Blade thrusts come lightning fast, sparks and blood raining down as their victims try desperately to block their attackers' offensive. All the while, the enemy wrestles with their worst fears reflected back at them in the Harlequins' ever-shifting masks.
Where a single Harlequin in battle is a player upon a stage, an entire army of them is a performing company with a bloody tale to tell. Known as masques, these warbands fight with breathtaking synchronicity. Troupes of Harlequins sprint across the battlefield, surging from hidden Webway portals to strike without warning. Skyweaver jetbike crews engage the foe in an aerobatic ballet, streaking above the heads of the enemy to hurl spinning star bolas.
Explosions blossom one after another, their roar a deafening crescendo accompanied by the howl of Starweaver transports and Voidweaver gunships opening fire. Amidst the mayhem, the masque's elite choreograph the carnage. Each Troupe Master directs their Players with the skill of an impresario and the strategic genius of a seasoned general. Death Jesters send volleys of fire to cut down key targets, always with an eye for what cruel humour they can find in the kill. Enigmatic Shadowseers use their phantasmic powers to terrify and misdirect, drowning the enemy in nightmare visions, and should one of the dreaded Solitaires deign to join a battle, they can slaughter entire enemy regiments in impossible displays of martial prowess.
To the untrained eye, the onset of a Harlequin masque is a riotous confusion of sound, colour and violence. Yet to refined Aeldari senses, clear patterns are revealed. Every moment is orchestrated; every Player knows implicitly how and when his comrades will strike. This is war made art and art made war, battle fought with perfect rhythm and meaning, and it is as lethal as it is spectacular.
The Webway
An Aeldari galaxy map which depicts known locations of the Webway , ca. 999.M41
The Webway was created by the ancient species called the Old Ones as a means of intragalactic travel. Via the Webway, the armies of these advanced beings could appear from hidden gateways in reality to strike at their foes without warning.
Furthermore, this sprawling network allowed the Old Ones to voyage between the worlds of their dominion without risking the fickle tides of the Warp . Known by some as the "labyrinth dimension," the Webway has been envisioned by mortal minds in myriad ways.
Some describe it as a galactic tapestry of shimmering strands, others a maze of glowing tunnels, or the veins of some vast living entity. All such accounts fall short of the truth, for the Webway defies neat categorisation. It is an elegantly crafted extradimensional realm located between realspace and the Immaterium , analogous to the surface of a still, dark pool, or a fine silk veil drawn across something foul.
In the wake of their disappearance or destruction during the War in Heaven against the Necrons and their C'tan masters, the Old Ones left the care and use of the Webway to their Aeldari creations, who used it for millennia to tie together their great empire .
The webway once spanned the galaxy, even stretching out into the empty void beyond. Those days are long gone. Ravaged by war and catastrophe, many of its tunnels have been torn open or amputated entirely, and a great number of its entrances have been sealed by the Aeldari themselves as a desperate measure to deny their foes access.
Despite its degradation, the Aeldari of every sub-culture still rely upon the Webway for swift travel, and none more so than the nomadic Harlequins.
A map of Harlequin activity across the galaxy after the birth of the Great Rift .
It is said that Cegorach is the only being in existence who knows every single path through the Webway. This might explain how his disciples possess such an intimate knowledge of its twists and turns, for the Harlequins walk the Webway without fear, appearing and disappearing at will.
The Harlequins utilise their knowledge of the Webway's hidden paths to outmanoeuvre their foes and strike from unexpected quarters. In this way, entire masques of Harlequins can position themselves in ambush, guaranteeing the element of surprise.
Of course, such a system is not perfect, for the Webway has become a broken and dangerous realm. The manifestation of the Great Rift at the start of the Era Indomitus tore at the Webway, ripping away spars already weakened by the passage of millennia and unravelling others, laying them open to the Warp.
Gates long sealed burst open to admit a legion of nightmares, and malefic Chaos worshippers found themselves at liberty to strike at the labyrinth dimension like never before.
So well-versed are they in the Webway's secret routes that many other Aeldari have credited the servants of the Laughing God with supernatural powers. It is the Harlequins who watch over the Black Library alongside its dark Guardians , and use its secrets to gain the upper hand in their war against Chaos . They utilise their knowledge of the Webway's hidden paths to outmanoeuvre their foes and strike from unexpected quarters.
In this way, whole masques of Harlequins can position themselves in ambush, guaranteeing themselves the element of surprise. Of course, such a system is not perfect, for the Webway has become a broken and dangerous realm. Still, this is little help to the general who suddenly discovers his armies overrun from within, slaughtered by a host of Harlequins before he even realises that battle is joined.
The Final Act
" Harden your soul against decadence. But do not despise it, for the soft appearance of the decadent may be deceptive. One need only consider the Harlequin dancers of the Eldar to see the truth of this proposition. "
The Harlequins battling the forces of Chaos in the Webway .
In recent years, the Harlequins' war against Chaos has been characterised by a newfound urgency. Full masques have become an ever more common sight among the stars. Appearing from the Webway, they can be found performing within the realms of their kin or battling the galaxy's disparate races in vicious campaigns of apparently random violence. As the 41st Millennium comes to a close, more and more Aeldari vanish into the Webway, forsaking their former lives to take up the Harlequin's mask. The Harlequins' numbers are growing, and many among the Aeldari wonder why.
The truth is inspirational and terrifying in equal measure. At the very heart of the Black Library there lies a silver-lit vault. Therein stands a plinth made of finely graven obstinite, upon which rests a crystalline book said to contain the words of Cegorach himself. Since the Fall, the tome's covers have remained closed, sealed shut with flickering chains of light.
Yet now, long-awaited portents have come to pass. A fallen sorcerer seeks the lore of the library. A king stirs in his court of death and silence, preparing to rise once more. Within madness' eye, the champion of the Ruinous Powers prepares to seize a realm long denied. As the signs have come to pass, so the bands of light about the tome have flickered and died.
Now, at last, the tome has fallen open. Within its pages the Shadowseers have found a script, a secret final act that changes utterly the tale of the Fall. Penned in inks of light and shadow, these words present a slender hope, detailing an intricate, galaxy-spanning performance with the potential to change the fate of the Aeldari race. Always, the strands of fate have pointed toward the victory of Chaos during the last, mythic battle known to the Aeldari as the Rhana Dandra .
Yet within the pages of the crystal tome is recorded Cegorach's ultimate jest, a way to trick Slaanesh into expending all her power not to destroy the Aeldari, but to save them. How such an impossibility could come to pass is unclear, for on this matter the final act is infuriatingly vague. Yet the Harlequins take their god's words on faith alone, for their devotion to Cegorach is total and his methods beyond question or reproach. Thus they have begun the steps of this final dance, and will see it completed, or else face absolute destruction in the attempt.
The Black Library
Deep within the Webway, protected by terrifying sentinels and Troupes of Harlequins, lies the Black Library. The Black Library is spoken of as a Craftworld, which in form it may be, yet it is very different from the other Craftworlds of the Aeldari, for the Black Library exists only within the Webway itself.
To reach this fabled realm, one must court madness itself, travelling secret passages through the Webway, evading the gaze of the horrifying entities that stand guard, and unlocking one of the library's cunningly hidden entrances amid veils of riddle and illusion.
The Black Library houses all of the Aeldari's most precious knowledge, and is said to resemble a vast, impossible Craftworld that exists only within the Labyrinth Dimension. There is lore here regarding every deadly galactic mystery that the Aeldari have ever encountered. The true nature of the ancient star-gods , the fate of the forsaken Phoenix Lord Arhra , even the origins of Chaos itself are but the merest fragments of the Black Library's archives of the forbidden and the forgotten.
In particular, the library's collection focuses upon all that the Aeldari know of Chaos, for it was Chaos that destroyed their civilisation and threatens them still from the Warp. Within the psychically locked rooms of the Seething Spiral lie grimoires of dark magic, their whispers and snarls shivering the air despite layers of runic wards. Beneath the Dome of Stars Extinguished, countless caskets of moonthorn imprison daemonic artefacts and essences.
Glowing lights drift through chambers in which ancient blades and alien skulls rest upon rune-carved plinths. Perhaps most valuable of all the library's many treasures is the collected psychic lore of the Aeldari and the countless species they have encountered. Captured in the crystalline thoughts of the library's long-dead inhabitants, these spectral secrets drift upon the wind like half-remembered thoughts, waiting for a mind strong enough to snare them.
On and on the dark corridors wind, a maze of starlit chambers and shadow-drowned oubliettes beyond count. Few mortals indeed have seen the inside of this sinister realm, and none would be foolish enough to speak of it; once someone has witnessed the true nature of the Black Library's sentinels, the fear of their vengeance lingers.
The Harlequins battle against Ahriman and his Thousand Sons forces during the 13th Black Crusade
There can be little doubt that, were the sanity-blasting secrets of this repository laid open to the Drukhari, the consequences would be bloody. Yet none amongst the aristocracy of the Dark City of Commorragh are foolish enough to waylay the visiting troupes of Harlequins openly, and the Laughing God's servants seem able to predict those snares that are laid for them in secret.
Only Supreme Overlord Asdrubael Vect has ever dared to publicly cross these enigmatic warrior artists, for a terrible doom indeed is believed to fall upon those who do. Of all humans , only a handful of Inquisitors have ever entered the confines of the Black Library, and then only in the company of Harlequins and under the closest supervision.
None have ever described their experiences in this mystical realm. These Inquisitors share a common bond with the Harlequins, for both are sworn enemies of Chaos and understand only too well the nature of the threat that faces the Aeldari and Humanity .
Recently, during the recent 13th Black Crusade of Abaddon the Despoiler in 999.M41, the Chaos Sorcerer Ahriman of the Thousand Sons Traitor Legion was able to penetrate the Webway and forcibly enter the Black Library, attempting to gain access to the arcane lore hidden within as part of his quest to better understand the very nature of Chaos itself. However, a massive force of Harlequins and Aeldari warriors were able to drive the Chaos Sorcerer back.
The Dance
A Harlequin troupe performing The Dance Without End, depicting the Fall of the Aeldari
The Harlequins travel in groups called "masques," large ensembles that perform and fight together, echoing the gatherings of Cegorach's devotees in ancient days. Each masque is formed around a number of Troupes and joined by the likes of Shadowseers and Death Jesters. Each member of the masque is a player in the grand performance. Each performs a part, taking up the role of some character from the mythic cycle.
Thus, one might be the Dawnsinger, another the Blinded Princess. Some roles are reserved for specific members of the masque -- for only a Death Jester may play the role of Death. The most ominous role of all is that of the Solitaire, the most sinister and abhorrent, yet also most fascinating and alluring, troubadour within the host -- for the Solitaire alone may take on the role of She Who Thirsts, Slaanesh, the great and hated enemy of all the Aeldari.
The Harlequin lifestyle is very like the life of a roaming mime or troubadour of Old Earth's medieval times. They wander the Webway and occasionally appear at Aeldari settlements: on a Craftworld, on Commorragh, an Exodite Maiden World , or even, rarely, a human world in the Imperium of Man .
They perform frenetic, acrobatic dances for the spectators there which are also called Masques. Their artistic works portray the Fall , the legendary decline that destroyed the Aeldari Empire , the birth of the Chaos God Slaanesh , and many other tales from the long history and ancient mythology of the Aeldari people. Troupes of Harlequins usually only treat with other Aeldari the night before a particularly auspicious battle.
They emerge unbidden from hidden portals, staging dazzling performances that tell of the legends of the Aeldari race. The Harlequins' masque is spellbinding; such extremes of emotion are reached in these stunning displays that a troupe can hold an audience of Drukhari completely in thrall as surely as any gladiatorial bloodbath.
In these pageants, each Harlequin plays the role of one of the figures from Aeldari legend, acting out stylised versions of Aeldari mythic cycles. When presenting their stories upon the stages of the Dark City, a Harlequin troupe's performance will always culminate with the tale of the Fall. This is a story of particular significance to the oldest Archons and Haemonculi , many of whom find Act One gratifyingly familiar.
Of all the parts of the mythic cycle performed by the Harlequin masques, the most renowned is the Dance without End. It is, however, far from the only tale performed by these enigmatic troubadours -- there is the Cripple and the Dragon, the Blades of Vaul, Isha's Tears, and many others. Each Harlequin in a masque assumes the persona of one of the characters from one of these epic tales at all times, and thus can be recognised by those Aeldari who know the tales. In the tale of the Blades of Vaul, for instance, Vaul is moved by sympathy for Isha and Kurnous, who are imprisoned by Khaine, agreeing to forge 100 swords for his brother to set them free. Vaul failed to make all the blades, however, and in his wrath Khaine attacked his uncle. The culmination of this pageant is the dazzling duel between the gods, played out by Harlequins of unparalleled skill.
Millennia of Mystery
Since the Fall, the Harlequins have pursued their trickster god's veiled agenda. Though their own records are hidden deep within the Black Library, the deeds of the Laughing God's servants are laced throughout the histories of their kin. The masques' appearances are the stuff of legends, and have become ever more frequent as the end of the 41st Millennium approaches:
Harlequin Masques
Harlequins of the Masque of the Frozen Stars set upon Space Marines of the Ultramarines Chapter
Most of the Aeldari live with the bitter knowledge that their gods are gone, having abandoned them or been destroyed in the Fall. Almost unique among their kind, the Harlequins know that Cegorach survived the Fall, and even now plans for the salvation of the Aeldari species. With every passing Terran year more Aeldari are drawn towards the way of the Harlequins, erasing their past identity and taking up the mask and motley of the Laughing God.
A masque is an army and a company of dramatic players both. It has no formal leaders, being instead a collective of like-minded devotees of Cegorach. All know their duties through their familiarity with the traditional roles of the characters they have adopted. No Harlequin rules their fellows for long, for all possess an equal voice.
A Harlequin masque unleashed upon the battlefield is a thing of boundless fury and mind-boggling precision, the ultimate melding of cold, alien wrath and preternatural agility. It is a spectacle of destruction as beautiful as it is murderous, as Troupes of warriors leap and bound through the enemy, slaughtering the foe even as Skyweavers cut off lines of retreat, herding the enemy onto the waiting guns of the Voidweavers and Death Jesters.
A masque possesses a synergy unmatched in almost any other fighting formation, an instinctive bond grown between the Harlequins as they travel and perform together and unleashed on the battlefield in times of war and strife.
The organisation of a Harlequin masque is unusual by the standards of the most of the forces fighting in the Dark Millennium -- after all, it is formed from multiple bands of dancers, mimes and other dramatic performers. The organisational strictures of a masque hail from ancient days, when Cegorach's devotees were theatrical performers first and foremost.
Since the Fall, a place has traditionally been reserved in a masque's structure should a Solitaire lend their considerable abilities to a cause, but they are otherwise unchanged, centred around three distinct Troupes: the Light, the Dark, and the Twilight. Each contains a different cast of characters, grouped by outlook and symbolism.
The Light, for example, is especially associated with swift action, the heroic protagonist, the sky and the day. By comparison, the Dark represents villainous antagonists, violent endings, and the night, while the Twilight is transitory, like the Webway or the fateful journey, comprising characters that bestride multiple or shifting worlds. This structure ensures that each member is aware their fellows' roles, upon both stage and battlefield.
This mutual understanding allows Harlequin masques to fight with near-prescient efficiency. Without the need for orders, each warrior knows both his own and his comrades' duties, as well as who will require support and who can provide it. Indeed, despite the lack of a formal military chain of command, masques are capable of acting with far greater synchronicity and discipline than most standing armies.
In battle, a masque seems less a group of individuals, and more a single, perfectly coordinated entity. Further enhancing this incredible efficiency is the fact that each of a masque's mythic plays has its battlefield counterpart, known by the Aeldari as its saedath . Essentially a strategic battle plan with an allegorical edge, these inform target priority, overall strategy, and whether the conflict should be led by the Light, Dark, or Twilight.
The appropriate saedath will be chosen based upon a range of factors; in some cases, masques specialise in certain mythic cycles, and will rely upon these to the exclusion of all else. In others, the ritual significance of the foe, the battlefield, or even such factors as time of day or quality of light will inform this decision. Whatever the choice, each saedath is an intricate and brilliantly conceived strategy.
While Harlequin masques tend to follow a time-honoured structure, established by the followers of Cegorach in ages past, each also has a distinct identity that reaches from their performances and onto the battlefield. For instance, the Masque of the Leaping Stars go to war heralded by the same kaleidoscopic displays that accompany their performances, while the Mourning Mist advance in ghostly silence, as ominous as the shadow of Ynnead from Aeldari legend.
This adherence to tradition and connection to their ancient legends strengthens the masques in battle. Every tactic they implement is a counterpart to the mythic plays, known as a saedath, a battlefield plan with an allegorical edge. These inform the masque's tactics and which Troupes will take the lead. Each Harlequin knows these saedaths on such an intricate level they are able to enact these strategies with flawless precision.
Structure of a Masque
The Structure of a Masque
The organisation of a Harlequin masque is almost as old as time, a deeply-engrained aspect of Aeldari culture that, while subject to small differences from one masque to the next, has otherwise remained fundamentally unchanged for thousands of Terran years.
The heart of each masque is the cadre of three Troupes, each of which is led by a Troupe Master . Appended to the three Troupes are the Skyweavers and Voidweavers . A full Masque will feature two squadrons of Skyweaver Jetbikes and one of Voidweavers.
Masques also usually include at least one Shadowseer and Death Jester , and it is common for one of each to fight alongside each of the three Troupes and, on rare occasions, a masque may also be joined by a Solitaire . This final Player is not bound to the masque, and will serve with it only as long as his own agenda and that of the masque are aligned.
Notable Masques
Harlequin Troupes
A Harlequin Troupe stands triumphant over some unfortunate Orks
Harlequin Players perform with breathtaking skill, whether their stage is a wraithbone and glass amphitheatre bathed in crystalline light, or the firelit hell of the battlefield. They tumble, sprint and leap, every squeeze of the trigger and slash of a blade bringing death to the enemy.
No Aeldari is born a Harlequin, and all manner of strange tales persist concerning how this metamorphosis occurs. Some are supposedly drawn from amid bustling crowds, beckoned into the shadows by a masked figure only they can see. Others simply vanish from their personal chambers on a Craftworld, their precious Spirit Stone discarded in their wake.
Harlequin Players of the various Troupes (from left-to-right) Light, Dark & Twilight
To become a Harlequin means erasing all that has come before, be it friends, family, path or purpose. However it happens, once an Aeldari becomes a Harlequin every aspect of their old identity is erased. Each joins a Light, Twilight or Dark Troupe, and assumes a new role at the behest of their Troupe Master. These roles -- each known by a ritual character name such as the Webway Witch, the Sun Prince, or Shaimesh the Poisoner -- inform every aspect of the Harlequin's personality from that moment on.
The difference between these three Troupes to a non-Aeldari observer would be hard to distinguish by visual clues alone. Save for a rune badge that is either a prism, heart or four-sided star, there is little else to distinguish them from each other. The true difference between them is how the Players act.
Harlequins from Light Troupes embody the heroic aspects of the Aeldari (and typically play such heroes in their grand displays). They launch brave charges, fight with boldness and hurl themselves into the fray like heroes of myth.
Dark Troupes, on the other hand, appear sinister and vindictive in their actions and the ways in which they finish off their enemies seem cruel, flamboyant and often very violent.
The Twilight Troupes are the strangest, their actions dictated apparently by some unknown motive. They appear capricious or obsessive, and their actions are hard to read, until the moment their true genius is unveiled.
A peculiarity that sets the Harlequins apart from their Craftworld and Exodite kin is that they do not bear Spirit Stones. Normally, when an Aeldari dies, their unprotected soul is devoured by Slaanesh in the Warp unless it is preserved inside one of these mysterious gems and joined with an Exodite World Spirit or Craftworld Infinity Circuit . Yet the Harlequins alone possess a secret that allows them to escape Slaanesh's jaws, and it is not one they seem willing to share.
The markings of the three Harlequin Troupes within a masque: Light, Dark and Twilight
To other intelligent species, the Harlequins' appearance seems to defy any form of squad identification or uniformity. This is exactly how the warriors of the Laughing God would have it; confusion is, after all, a tool of war.
To them, however, each Player is identifiable as belonging to one of three Troupe divisions within a masque: Light, Dark and Twilight, and each player in the Troupe will wear the markings of that Troupe. These icons are largely standard across the masques, with Light Troupes wearing a prism, Dark a four-sided star and Twilight a heart.
Each Troupe is led by a Troupe Master, who wears the master rune, an ornate version of the same basic device worn by his Troupe, often hollowed out and bordered by curved arcs. All Players commonly display their Troupe rune upon a knee, thigh or shoulder plate. Each warrior wears their masque's colours, and honoured Players may also display their masque's rune.
Harlequin Forces
A Harlequin Troupe Master
A Harlequin Troupe fighting against Cadian Shock Troops
A Harlequin Shadowseer
An Aeldari Harlequin Death Jester armed with a Shrieker Cannon
An Aeldari Harlequin Solitaire
A formation of Skyweavers of the Masque of the Midnight Sorrow
A Starweaver of the Masque of the Midnight Sorrow
A Voidweaver of the Masque of the Midnight Sorrow
Wargear
Weapons of the Lethal Art
The Harlequins are highly accomplished warriors and each Player, as their warriors are called, can be considered almost a one-man army in melee combat. Harlequin weapons fire is invariably lurid and spectacular in its effect, drawing upon the ancient technologies of the Aeldari to achieve impressively lethal results. Searing beams of polychromatic light, howling storms of shuriken blades, and billowing clouds of shimmering, hallucinogenic gas herald the Harlequins' explosive arrival onto the stage of war:
Harlequin agaith
Enigmas of the Black Library
These artefacts are items of incredible rarity, ancient treasures that are carefully maintained and stored within the Black Library:
Aeldari Lexicon Terms
Videos
Sources
Gallery