" The Whispering God gives new life, just as he takes it away. "
The rune of the Ynnari or "Reborn" in the Aeldari Lexicon .
The Ynnari , also known as " the Reborn ," are a kindred or religious sect of the Aeldari species comprised of members drawn from all of its other major kindreds, including the Asuryani , Aeldari Corsairs , Exodites , the Drukhari and the Harlequins .
Under the leadership of the prophet Yvraine , the "Daughter of Shades," the Ynnari seek to fully awaken the Aeldari god of the dead Ynnead , who they believe can defeat Slaanesh and restore the Aeldari species' unity and its lost glory.
They aim to achieve this in a ritual that would not require the sacrifice of the entire Aeldari species, using a method known as the "Seventh Path" or the "Seventh Way."
This path requires the possession of all five of the legendary Croneswords of the Aeldari Crone Goddess Morai-Heg , the mistress of fate.
According to the legends, if the Croneswords of Morai-Heg are placed in the right hands, they will give their wielders dominion over life and death.
Yvraine, the Emissary of Ynnead, believes that when all five Croneswords are brought together they will act as a physical conduit for Ynnead, focussing enough power to fully awaken her god and destroy She Who Thirsts forever, restoring the ancient Aeldari's ability to reincarnate freely upon death from the Immaterium .
However, with the revelation that the Keeper of Secrets Shalaxi Hellbane discovered the fifth Cronesword on Belial IV before the Battle of Iyanden and has secreted it away in the Palace of Slaanesh in the Realm of Chaos , the promise of the Seventh Path now seems all-but-impossible to achieve.
With their combined might the Ynnari have become a new force in the galaxy, and have been instrumental in several of the events that brought about the Era Indomitus of the Age of the Imperium , including the resurrection of the Primarch Roboute Guilliman .
There has always been an obscure school of thought in Aeldari society that states when every member of their species has died the souls that have been saved from Slaanesh's curse will form a gestalt entity, awakening a new god in the Immaterium with the power to defeat She Who Thirsts forever.
The Ynnari are comprised of individuals from all of the different Aeldari kindreds, including Asuryani , Drukhari and Harlequins .
Some amongst the Seers and scholars in Aeldari society claim that time of ending, the Rhana Dandra , is nigh, but that not all Aeldari must die to escape Slaanesh's clutches -- there is a new hope against the darkness.
Foremost amongst these are the Seers of Ulthwé , whose psychic machinations led to a premature awakening for the Aeldari god of the dead.
Soon after Ynnead was first roused from slumbering potentiality, a fraction of his will and power was imparted to Yvraine, the Daughter of Shades. An exile from Biel-Tan after following the Asuryani Paths of the Warrior and the Witch , Yvraine had walked every corner of Aeldari society -- she had become an Outcast, then a Corsair commander, and finally, after a costly mutiny, fallen from grace entirely to become exiled from even the most roguish of Aeldari subcultures.
She eked out a new existence from the haunted streets of Commorragh , fighting tooth and nail to become part of the Wych Cults -- such was her skill as a warrior that she rose to the rank of Succubus . It was in the white-hot crucible of arena conflict she crossed the threshold of death and found herself infused with the energies of Ynnead.
That was the crux point of fate that saw the birth of a new Aeldari creed -- in one mind-blasting moment Yvraine became a conduit for deathly psychic energies, invested with the ability to pass on her esoteric skills to those who joined her new and macabre doctrine.
With the aid of the mysterious Drukhari swordsman known as the Visarch , Yvraine cut her way free from the daemonic infestation that rocked Commorragh soon after her ascension. She made her way back to the craftworld of her birth, ripping free one of the fabled Croneswords from the wraithbone skeleton of Biel-Tan -- and in the process, fracturing the world-ship into skeletal shards of its former glory.
The Triumvirate of Ynnead -- the Visarch , the Yncarne , and Yvraine -- represent a new hope for the Aeldari in the Era Indomitus .
The shattering of Biel-Tan's Infinity Circuit unleashed a vast explosion of psychic energies that caused Warp vortices to spiral into being around the stricken craftworld, but also gave a focal point for the Aeldari god of the dead to manifest his Avatar in realspace .
So was born the Yncarne , a being both beautiful and terrible, whose mastery over deathly energies were the supernatural powers of Ynnead himself.
Since that fateful day, the Triumvirate of Ynnead -- Yvraine, the Visarch and the Yncarne -- has spread word of the nascent god's ascension to the mightiest of craftworlds, the far-flung fleets of the Aeldari Corsairs, the dark corners of Commorragh , and even the Exodite worlds.
A great many Aeldari, hailing from every sub-faction and allegiance save the most conservative and entrenched, have joined their cause. No abstract philosophy is this, for the effects of their new deity can be seen manifesting around them -- the Reborn can draw upon the souls within the Spirit Stones they wear to bolster their own abilities, can siphon the power of those slain nearby to invigorate their attacks, and turn their foes to ashes with the strange weapons and psychic powers they wield.
Asuryani Guardians of the craftworlds are a common sight in Ynnari warhosts, often wearing their symbol on the helm and displaying the characteristic crimson colours of Ynnari forces.
They have learned the secrets of the dead, bringing them closer to their ancestors and the lost glories of their fallen empire.
Tragically, many Aeldari see the Ynnari as corrupted by the very daemonic forces they seek to thwart. Others believe they are already dead inside.
And perhaps they are right. Though the Reborn seek to reforge Aeldari society in Ynnead's name and restore the glory of the ancient Aeldari species, their arrogant coercion of the metaphysical power that is the hallmark of their people has alienated as many factions as it has united.
Worse still, the real danger they pose to the Dark Gods has seen the forces of Chaos -- and especially those of Slaanesh -- rise up like a tsunami of devilry to consume the worlds before them.
Conflict and destruction erupts in the Ynnari's wake, and wherever they go, one thing stands out as a stark truth above all. As well as bringing hope, the Reborn bring death -- and in great measure.
Contents
History
A New Hope
The Sign of the Phoenix, the Aeldari Lexicon rune that represents Ynnead .
Amidst the twilight years of their people, the Aeldari had found a new hope -- something that could potentially stave off their doom altogether. In this, the leaders of the Ynnari saw a chance to unify their long-scattered species as one, healing old wounds and beginning a new era of progress.
The Aeldari had witnessed tumultuous change at the tail end of the 41st Millennium of the Imperial Calendar . Being a people blessed with psychic abilities and genuine precognitive power, the promise of cataclysm did not go unheralded. As ever, the Aeldari sought to turn the twists of fate to their own ends -- the High Farseer Eldrad Ulthran of Ulthwé more than any other.
Over the last few hundred Terran years of his immense lifespan, Ulthran had detected a confluence of soul energy whenever he had cast his mind into the afterlife of his craftworld's Infinity Circuit . The lingering essences of the dead were blending together into a slow but discernible psychic heartbeat, like that of some impossibly huge giant slumbering in the endless depths of the Aeldari soul.
It was the nascent essence of a god of the dead, Ynnead. In that great potentiality, Eldrad Ulthran saw hope.
It was the Pathfinders of Alaitoc , led by Illic Nightspear , who brought word to Ulthwé of the strange crystal moon of Coheria , which orbited the Imperial War World of Port Demesnus .
The white sands of the moon, glinting like snowdrifts in the stellar light, were formed of a mildly psychoactive crystal, shards of precious stone ground to powder by the erosion of the aeons. Though none alive knew it, Coheria had been on the edge of the ancient Aeldari Empire at the time of Slaanesh's birth, and was saturated in psychic residue.
Shortly after the nature of that moon became clear, Ulthran set in motion a cascade of events that would shape the galaxy.
The High Farseer projected his consciousness across the stars, enlisting the aid of a Harlequin troupe from the Masque of the Midnight Sorrow .
Led by the Death Jester known as Inriam's Spectre , the Harlequins were foremost amongst those Aeldari who believed that Chaos could be defeated and that Ynnead could one day help their species transcend their ancient doom.
Battle of Port Demesnus
The High Farseer Eldrad Ulthran faces off against Deathwatch Watch Captain Artemis on the crystal moon of Coheria during the Battle of Port Demesnus , initiating the partial awakening of Ynnead , Aeldari god of the dead.
Together, the High Farseer and his Harlequin allies enacted a great ritual upon Coheria that saw a crystal conduit established between all of the Asuryani craftworlds and the psychically-resonant crystal sands that covered much of that moon.
His plan was nothing less than to channel the foremost souls of the Aeldari Infinity Circuits into the same place at the same time -- in doing so awakening Ynnead long before the natural point of his birth into consciousness within the Immaterium.
This was an act fraught with peril, for it would plunge all the craftworlds into darkness -- and feasibly lead to their spiritual destruction. Yet it also held the potential to see the Aeldari species, living and dead, united for one glorious moment that could see Slaanesh slain forever, and its power usurped, taken for the good of the Aeldari people rather than their downfall.
In Ulthran's eyes, it was a gamble well worth taking.
The consequences of that great risk -- remembered in Imperial archives as the Battle of Port Demesnus -- were profound. The moon Coheria was under Imperial control, though it was considered minor and near worthless compared to the planet it orbited, Port Demesnus.
The Aeldari of Ulthwé launched a fierce assault upon Port Demesnus, orchestrated by Ulthran as a distraction to draw attention from his true agenda. It summoned an Imperial response -- predictably, the Imperium marshalled every asset it could spare from the system to rush to the defence of its primary holdings.
But there was one whose hunter's instinct was strong enough to detect the feint.
Watch Captain Artemis of the Deathwatch , a specialist in the art of xenos hunting, took his Kill-team to Coheria and there engaged Eldrad Ulthran at the critical point of his grand ritual.
Just as the moon's crystalline sands were thrumming with the psychic energy of countless Aeldari spirits, blood was spilt on both sides, and Ulthran's Harlequin allies were cut down.
When Inriam's Spectre was held at gunpoint, he asked his captor, Captain Artemis, if he could put aside his hatred in order to deal a deathblow to a far greater mutual foe -- the Chaos God Slaanesh. The only answer was a bolt to the head.
The ritual, so close to completion, went haywire. The psychic emanations intended to awaken Ynnead echoed out into the void, but they were unfocused, for Ulthran had been forced to fight for his life against the Deathwatch in order to escape Coheria at all.
The great gamble had failed, but for one aspect -- a tiny mote of Ynnead's divine consciousness that arced through space, eventually coming to land within the Dark City of Commorragh.
The Daughter of Shades
A few examples of colour schemes and runes worn by the Aeldari who fight for the Ynnari faction.
In the Drukhari arena known as the Crucibael, a grand clash was occurring between the famed Lelith Hesperax and the Succubus Yvraine. So far had her fame spread that as well as rich corsairs and outcasts, even a troupe of Harlequins was amongst the crowd.
Some had touted Yvraine as skilled enough to face even Lelith Hesperax in personal combat. This claim was usually a death sentence for even the most skilled warriors, for Hesperax was so immensely gifted in the art of combat that those who faced her usually died in seconds.
Yet there was something special about this fashionable new challenger. It was in the white heat of arena conflict that Yvraine crossed the threshold of death and found herself infused with the energies of Ynnead.
That night, Yvraine had fought fellow Wyches and Hellions , even Incubi . She had used every ounce of her skill to defeat a captive Tyranid Hive Tyrant bred from the strains of Hive Fleets Kraken and Leviathan that were taken from the planet Valedor.
After turning its attendant guard-beasts to dust with deft thrusts of her huskblade, she disintegrated the giant leader-beast in single combat. At the fight's climax, she duelled Lelith Hesperax herself, but found herself outclassed and was mortallywounded for her trouble, left as unworthy prey to die slowly of her injuries.
But it was the subsequent clash with a stick-thin, elegant priestess of Morai-Heg that was to seal her fate.
It is not unheard of for the larger vehicles used by Yvraine's Harlequin allies, such as the Voidweaver , to sport the insignia of the Ynnari alongside their own favoured markings.
The new opponent's body was bound up in a complex net of black silk, the icon of the long-dead Crone Goddess Morai-Heg emblazoned upon her forehead. Yvraine had seen that ceremonial garb before, in the statue gardens of her native Biel-Tan.
Her new challenger wore the raiment of an ancient priestess from before the Aeldari Empire had fallen.
The needle of the crone priestess darted out, and for a few seconds, Yvraine was forced onto the defensive. It was as if she was being assailed by the rapiers of two master fencers at once. On any other night, Yvraine could have beaten the priestess without breaking a sweat.
But she had been sorely wounded by Lelith Hesperax. Dismay took hold as she felt her strength draining away, her every blow weaker than the last.
It was at this point in time that the culmination of Eldrad Ulthran's failed ritual of awakening sent a mote of deathly power screaming across reality. As small as a meteorite splinter but with impossible potential, its searing arc brought it straight to the Crucibael.
Burning across Commorragh like a shooting star, the mote of Ynnead's consciousness slammed into Yvraine just as she found herself crossing the threshold between life and death -- for there, the awakening god Ynnead could reach her and imbue her with his divine power.
Perhaps it was because she was at that instant beyond the boundary of death that she attracted Ynnead's gaze. Perhaps it was because she had walked so many paths, thereby living a life reminiscent of the lost ancestors of her people, those Aeldari whose souls reincarnated naturally into new bodies upon their death in the days before She Who Thirsts waited within the Immaterium to swallow them whole.
Whatever the reason, the experience of becoming god-touched was transcendental. Though it granted her only a sliver of the nascent deity's deathly potential, Yvraine held more power in that moment than any other Aeldari alive. She had become the first, and most potent, of the Ynnari.
The Asuryani Guardians and Aspect Warriors of the craftworlds have heeded the call of Ynnead in great numbers, though not all adopt the Ynnari colours.
That crux point of fate saw the crowd gathered in the arena suddenly blasted by a tsunami of deathly power emanating from Yvraine herself. In one mind-shattering moment Yvraine became a conduit for deathly psychic energies, invested with the ability to manipulate spirit energy and pass on her esoteric skills to those who joined her cause.
It was the genesis of a new power in the galaxy, the birth of its high priestess, and the inception of a macabre Aeldari religion that thousands of souls have subscribed to since that day.
Yvraine's transformation was a boulder hurled into a stagnant pond. With the mysterious figure known as the Visarch fighting his way to her side, she cut her way through the anarchy of the rioting Crucibael crowd. The destructive ripples of that event flowed outwards, causing the metaphysical quake of a Warp dysjunction across Commorragh.
During the resultant daemonic invasion as a breach appeared in the Webway corridors containing the Dark City, Yvraine escaped Commorragh, leaving utter disaster behind her -- for the coming of her apotheosis had seen the half-reality of the Dark City torn wide open, and daemon creatures had slunk through in its wake.
Yvraine , the Daughter of Shade, calls forth the Avatar of Ynnead , the Yncarne , from the Infinity Circuit of Biel-Tan .
The Ynnari's flight through the Webway led Yvraine to Exodite worlds, several Aeldari craftworlds and even a Crone World in the Eye of Terror . In each location, she left dissent and schism behind her. Nowhere was the effect of her actions more clear than on Craftworld Biel-Tan, where she raised a new manner of being, the Yncarne, the Avatar of Ynnead.
To many Asuryani, Yvraine was a herald of disaster, but none sought to snuff out her flame as much as Asdrubael Vect , the Supreme Overlord of Commorragh, whose carefully maintained status quo she had so thoroughly shattered.
Asdrubael Vect's agents were sent to end her disruption for good, including a mercenary force headed by Drazhar , the Master of Blades.
But to others Yvraine represented hope, and thousands of Aeldari joined the cause of the Ynnari, amongst them the Phoenix Lord Jain Zar . The skeins of fate crossed and crossed again, until not even the most skilled Farseers could determine the optimum path through the maze of causality. The future was shrouded, and all the more disturbing for it.
Era of the Dathedian
On the ice world of Klaisus , known to the Aeldari as Ulthanash's Rest, Yvraine 's followers joined forces with the Imperium against Abaddon's vast legions during the 13th Black Crusade . It was a pivotal moment in both Imperial and Aeldari history, for without this fragile alliance the resurrection of Roboute Guilliman during the Ultramar Campaign may never have occurred.
The events at the close of the 41st Millennium saw the galaxy all but split in half by the celestial cataclysm the Aeldari call the Dathedian .
It brought with it a rise in aetheric phenomena -- and being part of a psychic race, the Ynnari were profoundly affected.
The Cicatrix Maledictum , that great tear across the fabric of space and time, has further divided the Aeldari people. After the birth of the Great Rift , the Asuryani sent out psychic communiques to every one of their craftworlds, taking stock of the sheer scale of the disaster that had befallen
them.
Two of their number did not respond, their psychic traces dwindling with every passing night. Though to an empire as large as the Imperium of Man this would have been considered acceptable losses, for it counts a million worlds and more in its number, for the Aeldari it was a cost so high it wrenched at the heart.
To lose two entire craftworlds was a bitter pill indeed. Perhaps one day they would return, just as Craftworld Altansar was drawn from the gullet of the Warp by the odyssey of the Phoenix Lord Maugan Ra . But for now, those craftworlds were gone. Whether their spirits enriched the growing gestalt of Ynnead, none save the Whispering God himself know.
Far from uniting the survivors against the common enemy of Chaos as Yvraine had hoped, the rift between the space-going nations of the Aeldari grew all the wider. Their scattered craftworlds are not Warp -capable, for the Aeldari would never risk their souls by willingly braving the hellish dimension of the Empyrean.
To do so would be tantamount to suicide, for it would court the hellish attention of Slaanesh, "She Who Thirsts," that entity which prizes Aeldari souls over all others. Neither can the Asuryani craftworlds traverse the Webway, that alien labyrinth dimension between the Warp and realspace through which smaller Aeldari voidcraft traverse the galaxy's hidden paths.
Even the smallest of the Asuryani craftworlds is the size of a minor moon, and there are few if any Webway gates large enough to accommodate them. The Harlequins still use secret ways within the Webway for the Aeldari to slide through the vast reaches of space in relative safety, and those who have converted to the Ynnari cause guide Yvraine and her growing congregation through the labyrinth dimension whenever they can.
But the coming of these ruinous times have rendered even the quietest space lanes fraught with peril. The Aeldari have become a people truly divided, and in so being, court a new fall.
In the cultural hearts of the Aeldari Empire, the wound of the Great Rift -- or the Dathedian in the Aeldari Lexicon -- festered and ran deep.
A collection of Ynnari warriors, including a Wraithguard , a Farseer , an Aspect Warrior and a Guardian .
No civilisation of the galaxy could look upon a night sky mauled by the energies of Chaos and not feel affected by it. To a species as sensitive to psychic phenomena as the Aeldari, the scar in the heavens was a constant dull ache in the mind, a reminder of all they had lost.
Perhaps it would never have existed at all were it not for the formation of the Eye of Terror, born from the sickening cataclysm of Slaanesh's birth. That stark reminder of their darkest hour gnawed at the mind, making Yvraine's claims of another god yet to be born -- though this time as a saviour -- ring hollow.
Across the galaxy, nightmares of guilt and doubt wracked the Aeldari. Even the callous and self-serving Drukhari were affected, forced to admit their way of life was under dire threat. A new era of war began as the turmoil within was turned into merciless strikes against ancient enemies, new foes, and former allies.
Much of the blame for the new disaster was put at the door of the mysterious death cult known as the Ynnari, especially upon Biel-Tan. There, the populace had been divided between fervent support for Yvraine and the outright condemnation that followed her visitation -- coinciding, as it did, with the daemonic invasion and subsequent fracture of the craftworld's Infinity Circuit during the Battle of Biel-Tan .
Yet the new era brought hope, too -- a new strand of fate that some believed would lead to the Aeldari rising to greatness once more. The being that Yvraine summoned from within Biel-Tan's broken wraithbone skeleton was an Avatar, of a sort -- and for an Avatar to exist, a god had to have risen in power in the Warp for it to incarnate.
The entity known as the Yncarne was proof that the Whispering God was real, and hence that he could perhaps save their souls from She Who Thirsts once and for all.
Drukhari Assault
After the Ynnari 's desperate resurrection of Prince Yriel turned defeat into victory during the Battle of Iyanden , they made haste to Macragge , there to bolster Humanity 's shield against the scourge of Chaos by bringing the Primarch Roboute Guilliman back from the brink of death. From there, they later defended a clutch of worlds from the scourge of Chaos, but always they were on the lookout for more Aeldari sympathetic to their cause.
On Saim-Hann , the Ynnari's high priestess Yvraine found no small number of converts. The Saim-Hann world-ship had been sorely pressed since the opening of the Great Rift . At the height of the Khornate Blood Crusade , it had sent five entire clans to hold back the gore-maddened Red Tide on Upsilon, securing a fraught victory before disappearing to leave the planet's Human survivors shaken and confused behind them.
At the same time the craftworld's fleet had fought void battles against Imperial Navy warships and elements of Abaddon the Despoiler 's vast armada of the 13th Black Crusade .
At first Yvraine's call to arms on behalf of the god of the dead Ynnead was seen as the last thing the seers and chieftain of the craftworld needed. It risked a schism dividing their clans, for tempers on Saim-Hann had always run hot.
A council was convened at the Speaking Place, a tribal hub in the midst of one of the craftworld's wilderness zones.Beneath the shimmering vault of a colossal bio-dome they talked of ancestors, spirits, and futures yet to be. For a while, they found accord around the ever-burning fires of that place.
Then the skies shimmered above the conflagration, and a Drukhari strike force burst from a Webway gate long forgotten. Their intent was to slay Yvraine with a swift decapitating strike, ending her threat to Supreme Overlord Asdrubael Vect 's power over the people of Commorragh .
The Drukhari's blades did not find their mark, for none other than the Phoenix Lord Jain Zar appeared to meet them in battle. The peace talks turned to fierce battle in moments, and the Ynnari were forced to flee before the people of Saim-Hann could be brought into the fold.
The Hunter Unleashed
In the wake of the Ynnari's emergence, ripples of causality, confusion and desperate hope that spread throughout Aeldari society caused waves of raw emotion to be reflected in the Realm of Chaos .
Slaanesh, attuned like no other to the echoes of the Aeldari soul, peered through hooded eyes at the shifting destiny of that ancient race, and began to plan anew to protect its existence.
Though all the Aeldari loathed and feared Slaanesh, the god they knew as She Who Thirsts had a deep and unbreakable spiritual connection with the Aeldari, and it longed for their souls upon their death. So it was that the rise of the Ynnari did not escape Slaanesh's notice. The god of the dead they worshipped, and the lack of vitality it represented, was anathema to Slaanesh.
Here was a newly rising, morbid god that could steal the delicious soul-fodder of the Aeldari from Slaanesh once and for all.
This potential had already been proven beyond a doubt upon Biel-Tan , where the daemonic invasion and subsequent shattering of the craftworld's Infinity Circuit had not yielded the feast of sweetmeats Slaanesh had hoped for, but a dry, dusty feeling of absence. Instead of empowering the Dark Prince, all that bountiful soul energy had been given form as the Yncarne, Avatar of the Whispering God.
Upon the Crone World of Belial IV , that same morbid entity had banished a coven of Keepers of Secrets with an ancient Cronesword . Even the high priestess of this slumbering god had committed soul-theft, a crime that no true god could endure. Yvraine had become a walking mausoleum,
harbouring hundreds of those spirits Slaanesh craved so deeply.
The Dark Prince desired to devour her and the Yncarne more than any other prey.
There was opportunity for Slaanesh in the twisting tides of fate. Many Asuryani -- and even self-serving Drukhari -- had converted to the cause of Ynnead. In embracing Ynnead, they were casting aside the shields of self-denial that had served them so well for so long. It was true that should every one of the Aeldari give themselves to Ynnead, the Whispering God would awaken, and Slaanesh's power be broken.
But should Yvraine and the Yncarne be hunted down and slain, Ynnead's tenuous existence would fade into allegory. The Aeldari that had stepped away from their
precious paths would not reach the afterlife of Ynnead at all upon their deaths -- but instead topple from their tightropes of self-discipline
to plummet into the waiting maw of Slaanesh.
There was one creature in Slaanesh's employ that specialised in the killing of demigods and avatars. That being was Shalaxi Helbane , the Monarch of the Hunt. Banished from living memory some six hundred years ago by the daemon hunters of the Grey Knights , Shalaxi had languished for centuries in the vast and sprawling Palace of Punishments.
Now, with the atonement for that past failure at an end, it was time for the Greater Daemon to rise once more, enter realspace and slay the prophets of
Ynnead. In doing so, Helbane would earn the favour of the Dark Prince once more.
After gathering many old allies -- amongst them the vengeful daemonic symbiote Syll'Esske and a coterie of Slaaneshi Heralds -- Helbane entered the Webway, three dozen Fiends trilling in delirious joy behind the war party. The hunt was on.
With Shalaxi's synaesthetic ability to blend a supernatural array of senses, Yvraine's soul-trail was soon picked out. Shalaxi's loping stride accelerated into a headlong sprint -- one that did not slow over time, nor halt for rest, for when the will of their patron is behind them, daemons do not tire. Dark dreams began to haunt Yvraine's nights.
It was upon the Dead World of Threccia that Helbane launched its first vicious attempt upon the Aeldari prophet's life. Yvraine was travelling in the company of a warhost of Biel-Tan, braving a dash along a chain of Webway gates that leapfrogged in quick succession across the executed planets of the Cursoai Reach. Helbane's ambush struck with blistering speed, just as the Aeldari host was exiting one such wraithbone portal into a rocky valley of lifeless dust and wind-scoured statues.
Two spearheads of Slaaneshi daemons swept down from the high passes above the valley, one encircling the rear of the Biel-Tan while the other swept around to their fore. Seeker Chariots rattled headlong into the Asuryani, their assault so swift that even the whip-quick craftworlders could not respond in time. Blood and spinning limbs flew as the sleek war engines drove deep into the Biel-Tan formation.
The narrow Webway routes the Asuryani followed had prevented them from fielding anti-grav transports. They were thus forced to cut their way out of the ambush on foot. To these faithful Ynnari, Yvraine's life was paramount; as Helbane cut an unstoppable red path towards the prophet, the host's Farseer divided his forces. Screaming their dirgesong, a spearhead of Howling Banshees joined Yvraine in performing a dance of lashing blades that slit a neat hole in the daemonic ranks and allowed them to dash up the valley towards the next Webway portal.
At the same time, the main strength of the Biel-Tan host hurled themselves at the Slaaneshi daemons. It was a suicidal attack, and Helbane ripped its way through the Aeldari at a ferocious rate. Yet their very deaths empowered Yvraine even as they proved the devotion of the Ynnari to their cause.
Lent impossible speed by the dead souls flowing into her mortal vessel, Yvraine outstripped even the Slaaneshi daemons, escaping into the Webway and leaving Helbane raging in her wake. It had been a desperately near thing, but the prophet of Ynnead had escaped her hunter, at least for a time.
But Helbane would not be denied its quarry forever.
Psychic Awakening
The Ynnari have drawn allies from all of the Aeldari factions, including these Harlequins of the Penumbral Masque and the Incubi of the Shrine of the Coiled Blade.
Since the Great Rift split the galaxy, the psychic powers that all Aeldari possess to some degree have burgeoned in different ways. It is generally accepted amongst the Farseers of the craftworlds that this is a direct result of the Dathedian introducing a vast bleed of psychic energy into the galaxy.
Of all the Aeldari, the craftworlders are most in tune with matters psychic. Without the Asuryani Path system -- that cultural process by which an Aeldari focuses his or her mind upon a single pursuit or skill to avoid the temptation of all others -- the Asuryani might have found this flare of psychic activity disturbing, and possibly even disastrous.
Yet the discipline of the Path was developed precisely to turn the Aeldari mind into a fortress against such unfettered activity. Of all the sentient species in the galaxy, the Asuryani could be said to have ridden out the swell of psychic energy the best -- indeed their entire culture was built around methods of discipline, guardianship, and self-denial in case they let their worst excesses rise from within to eclipse their sanity once more.
Those Aeldari who trod the Path of the Witch found their prophetic glimpses escalating into full and potent visions, magnifying their ability to parse the skeins of future fates and react accordingly.
On every craftworld their Runes of Warding burned out at a daunting rate, the protective symbols being used up almost as fast as they could be regrown from psycho-reactive material, but for now at least, the psychic threat posed by their daemonic nemeses was held at bay.
With this new influx of psychic energy came other new abilities, and many Aeldari subcultures found themselves able to draw on power from within. Even those who traditionally honed the use of the physical over the mental found their talents blossoming when they brought the two into balance.
The Drukhari Wyches and Kabalite Warriors of Commorragh have not been immune to Ynnead 's call.
The Ynnari were no exception -- wherever the psychic energies of death gathered thick, the converts to Ynnead's cause could literally breathe them in, harnessing that invisible power released upon death to empower them so they fought with blurring speed and incredible dexterity even for one of the Aeldari species.
After this Psychic Awakening began, the Ynnari's efforts against Chaos intensified. Yvraine gathered a great many allies to herself but soon found herself beset by new foes in the wake of the Great Rift's birth, most notably the Supreme Overlord Asdrubael Vect of Commorragh and the Keeper of Secrets Shalaxi Helbane , chosen by Slaanesh itself to hunt down the prophet of Ynnead.
Helbane has managed to move the last of the fabled Croneswords into the Palace of Slaanesh in the Realm of Chaos. These relics are said to be necessary to defeat Slaanesh without the need to sacrifice the whole of the Aeldari people in the Rhana Dandra .
Rather than despair at her apparently hopeless situation, Yvraine decided to find another path to defeat Slaanesh.
Notable Events
This variant of the Ynnari rune is partly derived from that of Craftworld Biel-Tan . Symbolically, the heart device is missing. The Ynnari symbol is often worn with a stylised oval at its apex, symbolising the Spirit Stone taken within.
The rise, fall, and rise again of the Ynnari has changed the course of galactic history -- not just for the Aeldari, but for those they count amongst their uneasy allies in the Imperium of Man .
With the stars riven by the Great Rift, it will take every iota of their foresight and skill to keep the fates of the mortal races of the galaxy from disaster.
Abilities
Members of the Ynnari carry the Spirit Stones of deceased Asuryani, whose souls they use to bolster their psychic powers.
Ynnari who are faithful to Ynnead are also able to siphon the psychic energy released by recent death to invigorate and empower themselves.
Those Ynnari who truly devote themselves to the worship of the god of the dead are able to communicate with the souls of the Spirit Stones they possess and can also draw upon those deceased Aeldari's skills, memories and experiences to aid them in battle.
Sometimes the Ynnari are surrounded by the souls of the dead Aeldari who have been absorbed by Ynnead. Their hissing whispers unnerve and distract nearby foes.
Organisation
There are two known sub-factions within the Ynnari. The first is the "Aeldari Bladehost," who fight directly under the command of Yvraine.
The "Soulbound Vanguard" are those warriors who choose to fight under the leadership of the Visarch.
Notable Ynnari
Ynnari Fleet
Videos
Sources